

SIGNALS: (Jane calling Spock?)

As in any survival operation, ALL signalization
instruments MUST be checked and ready to serve as soon as
you get aboard a raft. All articles MUST be attached on
you or on the raft to avoid lost or if you capsize. Those
instruments MUST be kept dry & ready to serve on demand.

Use the radio according to instructions, without
forgetting to save on the batteries until you are certain
that the rescue plane is around. In cold climate don't
forget to keep batteries warm. In multi-place plane use
the Gibson Girl as instructed.

Soon will be replaced by the path finder and soon to come
the bracelet watch path finder. From this special wrist
watch to the satellite and back, then you will NEVER get
lost or real stranded. Since you can beam up Spark to get
help from Tarzan in space. Big brother will be watching
you crazy as well.

Don't light the pyrotechnics pieces unless a plane or ship
is in sight, upon firing them, keep them away at arms
length and take well care that no burning pieces falls on
your raft.

Each time there is sun, use your heliograph mirror. Sweep
the horizon with it even if you see no ship nor hear no
plane. To make an improvised mirror, use an empty thin can
that you polish up, cut an "X" in the centre and use this
instrument as heliograph mirror.

SMOKE AND FIRE:

They make natural signals very useful and easy to do.
Smoke is an excellent mean especially during the day, with
clear weather and little wind, but they can be used at all
time. With those means one can make signals day & night.

MINI LIGHTING ROCKET PISTOL:

With this pistol you can shoot a lighting rocket which
produces a red star going up to 150 to 200 feet and
lasting 5 to 8 seconds. To use the pistol, shoot toward
the back where no one can be hurt. Put it at arm length
and shoot your heart content personal fire work, hoping it
will work for your safety.

OTHER MEANS TO SHOW OFF:* (Here's Jonny!)

One man rigged his parachute in an arrow to mark the
travelling direction he was to take, its colour stood out
vividly on the monotonous tundra.

2 others deciding to stay where they were landed, dug deep
trenches and stacked blocs of earth to break the
prevailing green. Get the sign north to south for better
contrast still.

RESCUE COMING WARNING:

Many a marooned man has danced in jubilation as a rescue
ship or plane came near by only to sink into despair when
it passed them by without seeing them. To avoid such
disappointments, you MUST learn to rig emergency signals
as soon as you land or crash.

SIGNALS WINTER / SUMMER:

Tramping messages in the snow, laying out trenches North
and South so that the shadows stand out in the sun moving
East to West.

SUMMER TIME messages can be spelled out with rocks, sod
blocks, logs, signal panel.

FIRE SIGNALS: # 1

1)   As the photo 167b* prepare 3 fire signal spaced about
100 feet from one another and placed in a triangular
shape. A group of 3 fires or a series of them means
international distress call.

2)   Along a river or ravine place the 3 fires in a
straight line about 100 feet apart. (A 4th one in case)

3)   Prepare the fire in an open place, in a field, a
swamp or on raft placed on a lake or bogs and near your
shelter so that you can run to light them up when you hear
a plane coming.

4)   Protect against weather troubles the fire that you
have prepared and keep them ready to light with dry wood
and candle, and tinder etc.

Keep a fuel reserve of green branches & grass near by at
hand to use in emergencies.

5)   If you are near the plane crash, you can use the oil,
the rubber which in burning give a thick black smoke.

6)   Once can make smoke signal every day to attract the
attention of the possible habitant of the region.

Forest warden, campers & rescuers who can see the smoke
during the day and the light during the night and search
the cause.

7)   It is not necessary to burn fires all day and night,
it would be a: Lost of energy  + lost of combustible =
totally useless.

8)   If a cold air zone at low altitude retains the smoke
down near the land, one can usually make it go up above
the cold front zone by constructing a bigger fire before
adding the substances to make smoke.

This procedure applies especially to regions of really
dense forest. Install your fires in a clearing if possible
and away from trees.

9)   If there exist a thin cloud layer, the night fires
will be less bright thus harder to be seen from above. In
such occasion it is still best to keep your fires well
lighted.

10)  Take all necessary precautions and MAKE SURE that the
fires will not spread to the surrounding vegetation
causing a real forest fire which would kill you for sure.

11)  Have a fourth one ready to go and make another
triangle should one of the 3 others fail to start.

COLOURED SIGNAL:

In survival kits one finds signalization bands in red or
orange tissue measuring 8" inches wide and 10 feet long
which can be spiked in the open ground giving them the
form needed for your emergency.

One can also agitate those bands while standing on a crest
or peak as soon as a plane is heard.

One can also colour the snow with the sea dye used when
rafting or smoke from a smoke rocket AP night/day. Water
Dye marker is also good in soft water.

AUDIO SIGNAL:

One can use those signals to party members to locate each
other after plane drop or any other emergency, so unless
you are in distress or members of rescue party avoid to
fire 3 shots. Don't waste ammo.

After each 3 shots fired quickly wait 10 minutes or even
more. You can also use the whistle which beats yelling by
a mile and half and less stressing and tiring.

WRITTEN MESSAGES:*

See note* at psycho,  leave in a bottle or food can or
plastic container or bag which you suspend to a tree, a
pole stuck in open ground or under a pile or rock. (Not
too low under.)

Also you MUST leave on the ground a sol-air sign of your
direction taken.

To help yourselves and other rescuers, mark along your
path & any change coming along.

And MAKE SURE that the indications given are exact. (Name
of this lousy travel agent, ex-wife, mother in law, bank
secret number, etc.)

SPACE AGE RESCUE: SPACE TECH!

Since 1987 finally we have in the sky 4 geo-stationary
satellites build and operated by USA, Canada, France &
Russia which already have saved hundreds and hundreds of
life through this path-finder satellite gimmick, which you
can easily put aboard your plane boat, car or jeep, in
your shack if powered by dynamo.

No one should refuse this chance to save himself or to
friends and family tons of pains and worries and
anguishes. All you need to do is to switch on the apparel
and it does everything else.

It beams a steady signal to the satellites which by
triangulation of them 4 will spot you dead on target
within 5 feet anywhere and anytime in the world under the
worst adverse weather conditions or nearly.

The only time it would not work beside the fact of being
damaged or power failure is if there was an atomic war.
Which any atomic bomb does beside killing and destroying
and creating havoc, is to throw in the atmosphere what is
called EMP.

Electro-magnetic-pulse,  under that pulse all known and
existing transistor apparatus,  radio, tv, car, plane,
electrical power line,  etc. They all go kaput, but those
deep under ground are protected.

Soon to come also is the wrist-watch path-finder that any
one could use but this is not in the public market only in
the army.

By the way did you know, some of us do, that the new kind
of key-hole type of satellite can see anyone reading his
newspaper or taking a sun-tan or even smoking at night
anywhere in the world.

All it needs to know is where you are, they can not read
yet the fine print of the morning Pravda or Times but they
read the title of its front page, and this in winter,
snow, summer, rain or cloudy day of Mid England or Perth
Australia.

Big Brother is watching. So imagine showing to the sun-
glare a space blanket sheet in open space of hill etc.
would attract attention quite well although deflecting a
bit from your own place because of lesser heat unless you
stand in the middle of it.

The heat scanner will spot the blanket or rock that is
bigger and has more heat, a mountain has 7 times more heat
than the valley for your knowledge.

A big bird like a crow would also affect the air heat
scanner since it is higher up than you thus deflect it
from your own nearby presence.

SOL-AIR SYSTEM: *

Use the tissue band of a chute or skinned off logs,
stones, sod blocks, green branches on snow in order to
create the maximum of contrast in an open space.

ALL signs MUST have 40 feet long minimum.

1)   GRAVELY WOUNDED, NEED DOCTOR  =  ++++++++++++++++
2)   NEED MEDICAMENTS =  +++++++++++++   +++++++++++++

3)   IMMOBILIZED =  Show a BIG   " X "
4)   FEED FOOD & WATER = Big: F

5)   Need arms and ammo =  Show 2  " V "  One inside the
     other yet space them out good!
6)   Need Map & Compass = SQUARE
7) Need Signalization Battery = show 2 lines
     disconnected lamp & CB Radio =   +++++   +++++
8)   Show us DIRECTION TO TAKE=  K
9)   I go in this direction = show a big arrow    WHERE
>

10)  WILL ATTEMPT TO TAKE OFF = Up & Down & Up  line
with another on the right shape as an ARROW =  I >

11)  Plane seriously damaged = show: 2   " L " But they
are put one against one another as a broken rectangle does.

12)  Probably Safe to land here = " TRIANGLE"

13)  Need Fuel & Oil = " L "

14)  All Well =  " L L "

15)  NO =  " N "

16)  YES =  " Y "

17)  Not Understood =  2  " L "  One toward East & West

18)  Require Engineer =   " W "

AIRCRAFT - LANDING LIGHTS:

Use these if still available of course and all aircraft
parts needed, the plane itself makes an excellent signal
so cut down nearby trees and shrubs that may conceal it
from the air.

Keep it clear of snow. Shiny piece of metal from the plane
laid on the ground will reflect the sun, or carry them on
a raft and leave them prop a bit or use a clear sheet of tissue.

SHADOW:

They are quite effective when built in a clearing and of
sufficient size & contrast.

In Canada across with arms running  NORTH-EAST / SOUTH-
WEST & NORTH-WEST.

SOUTH-EAST = Will catch Maximum Shadow. Depending where in
the world you are, adjust accordingly to cross the sun
path directly opposite to its course.

VALUE OF SPACE AGE BLANKET:

For first-aid in giving reflecting warmth, for fire
reflection warmth and light and signals, for rain-proof
shelter, signals of all type.

Shadow protection in the Desert, fish lure, water
collector etc. All around mirror reflector when put on a
tent or teepee shelter. Get one in your pocket one in your
pack-sack and survival-kit*.

CONSTRUCTION: SUMMER / WINTER:

1)   ARCTIC WINTER = snow block wall, line the blocks
     along the trench from which the snow blocs were cut.

2)   ARCTIC SUMMER = sod, stones, sand or driftwood walls,
     space age blanket or any light tissue.

3)   BUSH WINTER =  Tramped in the snow, lay green boughs
signals, in the snow or better STICK them in the snow &
build a wall of brush and boughs around them.

4)   BUSH SUMMER =  Rock pile signals, bush or logs for
letters. Use fresh peeled logs and bark or sod blocks.

INFORMATIVE SIGNALS:

Leave them well in sight and signal to your direction
taken. Wood charcoal, pen, lipstick will do the job and
could save a lot of trouble to rescuers and to yourself.

IN SHORT:

Establishing contact with or attracting attention of the
searchers and rescuers MUST be your MAIN objective as soon
as your VITAL NEEDS have been taken care of. In line they are:

F/aid, water, fire,  shelter, signal. Then one can think
of praying, (Blessed! Who trust in God!) Food, hunting,
fishing, travelling.

1)   Have your signals all ready & show them effectively.

2)   Prepare as many types of signals as you can at the
     best possible site.

3)   Protect signals & equipment from moisture and cold.

4)   Remember that any unusual sign or colour contrast is
     visible from the air, even a single trail in the  snow.

5)   Use gun sparingly & with caution.

6)   Smoke and a Mirror are your BEST signal when no radio.

7)   Care for signal equipment and learn how to use it.

LIGHT SIGNALS # 2: JAPANESE LANTERN JOHN WAYNE STYLE!

Any form of light can be used. Camp fires, flashlight,
candles or grass, torches, space blanket, mirror and
heliograph, mirror type.

A good trick is to employ a light inside a tepee or tent
which lights up like a giant Japanese lantern. Also a
teepee type of construction that you roll around your
space blanket for an all around mirror.

TORCH TREE:

1)   Select an evergreen tree with thick foliage, one that
is isolated from other tree to stop forest fire danger.

2)   In winter shake the tree, use a rope to do so, or
hammer the base and remove as much snow and ice as
possible.

3)   Build a "bird's nest" in the lower branches of the
tree using branches of other trees with dry kindling and
barks mixed with them.

4)   Around the base of the tree, prepare a bonfire-using
feather sticks, dry splintered wood, bark (birch best),
gas or any combustible material around, oil from plane
allowed to spill on ground before it freezes in the motor,
can also be used without problems.

5)   This bonfire will burn and ignite the bird's nest
which helps fire up the whole tree making it a gigantic
torch visible for miles around by plane or anyone around.

6)   Prepare this signal in advance and use precaution against
getting the kindling wet or wind shift spreading fires.

7)   Follow signal instructions to the letter. Don't
invent them. These methods are know by others as well.
Don't confuse us Please!

FLASH FIRES:

If gas and oil are available use only when plane is
sighted. Pour the fuel on the ground or saturate piece of
tissue & light them when needed.

Take ALWAYS fire precaution. Gas and oil poured in sand
pail with holes in it to make it breath will produce
landing light if needed. Oil has to be  warmed up before
it takes on fire.

HELIOGRAPH MIRROR PLATE OR NOT:

Lately it is sold a credit card size made of metal that
has one side as a heliograph mirror and the other side as
a multi-function tool, such as can and beer opener, wood
saw, knife, ruler, file screwdriver,  fits in your wallet,
keychain, etc. Get one it really comes handy & it's ONLY
10 dollars.

This very useful and important and easy to carry piece of
equipment MUST be on you at all time and a spare one in
the S/Kit or in your car, plane, boat.

This device has probably been responsible for affecting
more rescues than any other methods.

It is simply a mirror with a hole in its centre so that it
reflects the light to aim accurately at the searchers.

Now how to use it accurately, catch the sun, use the hole
and beam on your hand and finger first.

Carry this hand or finger toward the plane or ship, remove
your hand and the beam that was pointed on it will reach
the plane or ship in a flash.

It can be seen many miles away on a clear sunny day. If
you have no mirror use a piece of shiny polished metal,
the side of a ration can make a good usable mirror.

Carefully cut a cross about 1 inch long in the center of
the sheet with the point of your knife while the metal is
laying on a flat surface.

At night when you use your flashlight in one direction
another person can take some of that beam & shoot it
backward.

A candle light or lamp or lantern can be used effectively
Each time there is sun.

Use the mirror, sweep the horizon with it even if you
don't see or ear a plane or ship or person.

90 DEGREE ANGLE:

If the angle of the sun and the plane or ship is not too
great (90 max) you can hold the mirror 3 to 6 inches away
from your face and sight the plane through the small hole
in the centre.

The light from the sun shinning through the hole will form
a spot of light on your face and this spot will be
reflected in the rear surface of the mirror.

Then still sighting on the plane through the hole, adjust
the angle of the mirror until the reflection of the light
spot on the rear of the mirror coincides with the hole in
the mirror and disappears. The reflected light will now be
accurately aimed at the plane.

If the angle between the target and the sun is greater
than 90 degree, sight the plane through the hole then
adjust the angle of the mirror till the reflection of the
light spot on your hand coincides with the hole in the
mirror and disappears.

This method will work where the plane or ship is almost on
one horizon and the sun almost 180 degrees away on the
opposite direction.

INTERNATIONAL BODY SIGNALS: 

There are certain established body signal that will be
recognized by most airmen.

NEED URGENT MEDICAL HELP = :

Lie on your back with arms stretched straight behind you.
Another widely used signal indicating severe injury is the
crossing of the arms across the body.

EVERY THING IS ALL RIGHT DON'T WAIT =:

Standing erect with the left arm hanging at the side and
the right one upraised.

ABLE TO PROCEED SHORTLY AND THE PLANE SHOULD WAIT IF
POSSIBLE = Stand erect, leave left hand at the side and
you hold the right arm horizontal.

NEED EITHER MECHANICAL HELP OR PARTS AND THERE WILL BE A
LONG DELAY ON YOUR PART =:

If you continue to stand erect & lift both arms
horizontals.

PICK ME UP = :

Stand and hold both arms straight above your head beam me
up Scotty or SPOCK!

DON'T LAND HERE = :


Swinging your hands side wise back & forth above your
head.

COME DOWN HERE = :

Squat on your heels and point in the direction of the
recommended landing place.

RADIO ON = :

If you have one and that the receiver is working, this you
can signify by cupping your hands  conspicuously, over
your ears.

DROP A MESSAGE = :

If you want the pilot to drop a message, swing the right
hand down in front of you to shoulder height several
times.

YES = :

Wave something such as a shirt etc. UP & DOWN in front of
you.

NO = :

Wave such an article back & forth in front of you.

Although signs vary with different groups the plane can
make an affirmative by dipping up and down the way the
head is nodded. Show negation by a slight zigzag as
shaking the head.

Green flash from a signalling lamp or plane rocking from
side to side is to tell that the plane has understood the
message. Red light on the signalling lamp or a complete
right hand circuit that is has not.

COAST GUARD SIGNAL:

Certain distress signals are used by the US Coast guard. A
red light, or red rocket or flare at night indicates that
you have been seen and that help is soon forthcoming.

HOLD AWAY = :

Is signalled by waving a red flag from shore during
daylight and by displaying a red light at night.

SLACK AWAY  = :

Is indicated when a white flag is waved from the shore by
day. Waving a white light slowly back & forth, firing a
white rocket or setting off white roman candle.

BEST PLACE TO LAND =:

During the daylight the beckoning of a man ashore or the
burning of 2 torches close together.

A SIMPLE WAY TO PREVENT TRAGEDY:

An extremely simple precaution that would save thousands
of hours of needless effort, anxiety and agony every
season is for each of us to make his plans known every
time we are about to head to the bush. Or to leave
messages well in sight.

Even when we park his car beside the highway with the idea
of perhaps fishing for an hour it would take only a few
moments or two to jot down that information and to wedge
it in the wind  shield wiper.

Any of us can think of numerous reasons why we might
somehow be delayed & in dear need of help.

TRICK TO RETRACE yourself WHEN LOST?:

The hunter tries as calmly as possible to calculate the
place where he is from, then using land mark such as dead
or high tree hills etc. he walks the most straight forward
as possible toward his goal.

Meanwhile he marks trees on both sides with his knife or
axe or a rock so that he can come back should he have to.

Then he MUST try to evaluate as best as he can the
travelled distance rarely more than one mile and not to
overpass this distance.

Even counting his steps so as to do walks as similar as
possible 1000 double steps give roughly 1 mile, then after
that he should come back to his starting point, easy since
he marked his way.

He then will go in the opposite direction for the same
time or distance and mark his trees with 2 landmark and
ALWAYS on both sides, then return if unsuccessful.

There is NO doubt that if he does the 4 lines he will find
his old trail back. He will not have walked more than 8
miles which is easy to do in one day.

SMOKE & LIGHT SIGNALS:

When you show 3 big puffs of smoke in slow succession it
means to say = GO AHEAD.

An uninterrupted smoke column means = STOP!

Small puffs alternating with big ones mean = DANGER!!!

To make your fire to smoke up, light it as usual and when
it is going good add up green leaves, damp grass, tire
pieces, etc. Ping-Pong balls that are crushed make
excellent smoke signal that you carry in a small container
in your s/kit.

Cover the fire with a damp blanket, take it off to make
smoke puff and put it back on.

Smoke will be more or great a puff depending of how long
you take off the blanket, so for a short puff burst count
1 & 2 then place it back for counting to 8 seconds.

Remove it for 2 seconds and start over, now for the long
dash count to 6 seconds & live 4 seconds between each
burst of smoke.

LIGHT SIGNALS # 3:

They are the same as with smoke but use dry wood etc. to
give a good light. Plastic ropes give quick heat burst and
also stronger light for signal.

2 men hold a blanket in front of the fire, that is between
the fire and those to reach, so that they will only see
the fire when desired.

And if possible a third one reads the message to do by the
others. Again they count 2 for short spot, 6 for long
spots and 4 in each interval.

SEMAPHORE:

Most soldier or seaman know them, here is the letter and
the position of the arms,  it looks complicated but in
fact is simple. We give you the signals as they appear to
the reader.

For the letter: " A to G " We use only one arm (right)
while making it do a circle,  1/8 of the arc for each
letter. (7am, 9, 11 etc.)

Then from " H to N " except for  "J"  the right arm takes
the position of  "A"  & the left arm moves as the other
one did at start.

From "O to S" the right arm is in "B" position (9pm) and
the left arm goes around its merry way.

As for  "T U V" and the sign  "Annul"  the right arm is in
"C" (11am) the left arm does the circle in 4 different
positions.

The letter  "A to I" also equals the Numbers &  "K" = Zero
at the condition that you warn by signs.

Use the code = right arm at 12 AM and left arm at 2 PM to
signify your using NUMERALS. Numbers can also mean a
number of different messages.

For the control the control station repeats the numbers.
This is important to do.

If the central station makes an error it does the signal =
Right arm at 11 am & 5pm for the left arm.

Note about the signal colour of the flag: 1/2 of it is
white at the top and the other 1/2 is black for better
contrast at the bottom.

And after the other gang has repeated this sign, it
restarts to do the numbers. The sender MUST ALWAYS face
the receptor position.

When the reception centre has correctly read a word, she
sends her regular signal. If it does not answer to a word,
the expediters or senders know that they have not been
read or heard, they will then repeat it till answered.

YES = 1 blow  2 = NO  or reverse.

DON'T FORGET TO WRITE DOWN MESSAGE CODES. & TO CARRY THEM.
(*Mnemothecnic phrases to invent via Morse code?)

MORSE CODE:

A =  * +      =  as
P =  * ++ *   =  apte

B =  + ***    =  bees
Q =  ++ * +   =  pho

C =  + * + *  =  coco
R =  * + *    =  ere

D =  + **     =  duo
U =  ** +     =  ouf

F =  ** + *   = eife
V =  *** +    =  oeuf

G =  ++ *     =  glu
W =  * ++     =  onf

J =  * +++    =  offr
X =  + ** +   = noix

K =  + * +    = kim
Y =  + * ++  = lynx

L =  * + **   = elie
Z =  ++ **    = zzou
N =  + *      = nu

Naturally you don't see listed the letters composed only
of short dot or long shots dash.

Easy to remember all the world knows them to be: EISH &
TMOCH (TOO MUCH?)

You have certainly heard of the opposite method, here it
is. Converting Dash in Dot & Dot in Dash.

+     E  T *
++    I  M **
+++   S  O ***

++++  H  CH ****
+**** 1  6 *++++
++*** 2  7 **+++
+++** 3  8 ***++
++++* 4  9 ****+
+++++ 5  0 *****

The letter C V Z escape this method of
classification.

+***  J   B *+++
+**   W   D *++
+*    A   N *+

++*   U   G **+
++*+  F   Q **+*
+*+   R   K *+*

+*++  L   Y *+**
+**+  P   X *++*

It is very difficult to learn Morse code without the help
of the trick of mnemothecnic so choose the one you want or
create your own set of words or phrase but don't change
the value of the dots nor of the dash.

ALL signals are sent in group ex:
AR  =  + * +  * +

RECOGNIZING THEM: (Dot * Dash -)

You will save an unnecessary mental process by recognizing
that directly as " A " without having to go to the trouble
of figuring that:

Dot / Dash is really also: Dit / Dah of old timers which
in turn is the first letter of the alphabet  (*) = Dit (-)
= Dah !

TRANSMISSION SIGNALS:

DIAMETER =  Equal the straight line in a middle circle. (
22/7 ) And other basic measuring measures to be included
later on.***

STAY WITH AIRPLANE TICKET: *

Except under extenuating circumstances when it is
obviously only a very short distance in a frequented route
or populated area and there is negligible chance of any
individual of getting lost the "Hudson Bay Cie"
emergencies instructions specify.

ALWAYS STAY near with airplane. It is much easier to
locate an airplane that may have been forced down in
Northern Canada than an individual walking through the
North."

If for any reasons whatsoever one goes away from a downed
plane even for a short period he owes to himself and
searchers to leave a note in an obvious place stating in
detail his plans and where he is going and other important
notes.

A plane that has crashed or been forced to land will be
easier to spot if brightly hue and highly reflecting
objects are placed on and about it.

The Hudson Bay Cie. has found efficacious to remove cow
panels and to place them with their unpainted surfaces
upward to act as reflector.

Coloured wing covers, the 300 years old Cie. found that it
makes it easier  to locate down planes from the air.

ALL such items as well as the aircraft itself should
manifestly be kept clear of snow, frost and debris and
cleared to be seen.

When flying over isolated area, especially in private
plane, it is no more than a conservative measure to have
along clothing and particularly foot wear that will enable
one to fend for himself in the even of forced landing.

Besides if you can afford a plane you should or MUST have
enough money to buy a satellite path finder to help along
and save pains, troubles, worries and money to all,
including you first & loved ones who await your return.
(Travel agent, income tax boys, as well as your dog,
mother in law? Insurance agent and others.

In such emergency it is often possible to become
acquainted or generally familiar with the terrain while
still airborne. Even when bailing out up to a term.

An important factor then being to establish if possible a
line to the wrecked plane if only because of its wealth of
usually actual and even after a fire potential survival
equipment.

IN CASE OF AN IMMEDIATE CRASH LANDING:

What can be  ALL important is to be braced at the moment
of the severest impact and not to relax at what may be the
initial shock caused by the tail's touching.

Actual continuous bracing MUST NOT be started more than a
couple minute too soon or faltering muscles will be unable
to maintain their tension.

A MAJOR DANGER in many instances is that of the head being
snapped disastrously forward.

One PRECAUTION is to swath the head in coats and in other
protective material available.

Another Precaution in case of absence of seat belt is to
sit with the back toward the front and with the head held
down by firmly clasped hands.

Urination is ADVISED to help lower the chances of internal
injury. (Yes? In your pants!)

SIGNAL FIRES # 2: *

A fire in addition to its warmth and for good fellowship
makes one of the better signs and in fact if we are in any
of the numerous areas where regular watches are kept from
towers & observation planes.

We will in an emergency often have only to kindle a fire
to attract attention and help.

SIGNAL MOST  EASILY SEEN:

One way to send up the smoke that will make the
conflagration MOST seen & conspicuous during daylight is
by throwing evergreen boughs into a hot fire.

Black smoke can be obtained too with oil from the wrecked
plane or disabled outboard or car motor.

This is one reason in cold country the sump oil may well
be drained off before congealing while the plane engine is
still warm.

Not only does it make a hot fire particularly when mixed
with gas, but poured on a hearty blaze it rolls up a
tremendous surge of black smoke.

Water will give a white smoke, although this as every one
realises too much dampness will drastically quell and even
kill the fire.

A long lasting smudge can be built however by covering hot
coals with humid green foliage, wet dead leaves,  slowly
burning green wood,  moist decayed wood, damp animal dung
etc.

If there is any scarcity of fuel, it may be preferable to
keep only a small fire going if needed for comfort and to
concentrate upon heaping up signal pyres to be lit at a
moment notice.

The smoke from a strong smudge fire can, incidentally be
INVALUABLE for indicating wind direction to the rescue
plane pilot.

Gas in the sand hole or trench is poured then lighted is
well seen from above, good to make night light signs.

DISTRESS SIGNAL:

The most universal noted distress signals are based on the
number three 3 flashes, 3 shots etc. SOS =  *** +++ ***
(save our shirt)?

There is unfortunately no general agreement as to how
signal shots out to be spaced.

Some say to fire the 3 blast as quickly as possible
although it is not unusual for a hunter to do that while
hunting also. If 3 = SOS then 2 shots =  all is well!

The practice to separate each shot by about 5 seconds in
more logical especially as this gives to an experienced
listener the time he may need to determine where the
signal comes from. In any event this point MUST be decided
in advance by members of a group.

PARTY SIGNALS:

One of the simplest and most valuable precaution a party
in a wilderness area can take is to agree upon a set of
signals for its own use.

These should be brief & uncomplicated and MUST take in
account all reasonable contingencies such as the
possibility that any member may be out or short of ammo.

You also be well advised to have this code committed down
on paper so that each member has his own on him at all
time. Possibly rolled within his waterproof match case.

WHISTLES:

Particularly handy in remote area to signal your position
and to give messages. DON'T shout, just blow the whistle.
Shouting makes tired and creates panic and exhausts you. You
should wear it all time!

WIGWAGGING: NOT ZIGZAGGING!

Such a signal transmitted by flag can be seen for miles
under favourable conditions especially if the sender
places himself in an unobstructed spot against a
contrasting background.

Reading with the help of field glasses we have thus sent
messages mountain to mountain.

The flag may be something as large as a handkerchief or a
shirt knotted to the end of a light pole some 6 feet long
so as to expose an easily distinguishable area.

It can usually be most easily manipulated if the base of
the staff is held at wait level in the palm of one hand
and the stick gripped a dozen inches or so higher by the
master hand.

All the letters start with the staff held straight upward.
The dot " * " is made by swinging the flag down to the
right and then back again.

A way to fix this in mind is to remember that the word
right has a dot over the " i ".It will follow that the
dash + is made by swinging the flag in similar manner arc
to the left and back.

You will find that the easiest way to keep the flag flat
for maximum visibility will be to move it in tight loops.

To send the letter " N " swift left & back & then right &
back in what is when you look up at the tip of the staff a
narrow figure of 8.

Hold the flag upright a moment to end a letter. Lower and
raise it in front of your to finish a word.

Swinging right + left + right / left + right  Will signify
the end of the message. Signalling is not correctness of
form but common sense?!?

SIGNALLING:

If you think others are in hearing range, blow whistle,
fire gun. Control shouting, it can become tiring & can
increase anxiety.


Signalling is the ONLY active thing you can do to aid in
your rescue, but praying ALWAYS helps as well for you
mental & moral attitude.

Start fire. After fire is well on, add green branches &
leaves to increase smoke. Smoke is best signal in forest.
During summer fire spotters will see it.

MAKE SURE fire is in safe area built on a non burnable
mineral hearth to avoid starting forest fire.

Direct signalling to aircraft use mylar of the centrefold
or mirror to reflect sun light at aircraft or search party.

If you think others are in hearing range, fire gun 3 times
in a row it's an international distress signal.

Blow whistle. Don't yell for voice range is short, it
causes exhaustion & stimulates panic.

If down in brush with injury, find stick, attach orange
cover elevate above brush & wave to attract attention.

SNOW SIGNALS:

Find clearing, scatter branches, rocks, dirt & or tramp
out largest possible " X " (minimum size 18 feet) to
attract aerial searchers.

They MUST be North and South so that the shadows stand out
in the sun moving East to West.

DESERT SIGNALS:

In Desert do the same on sand.

If such ground markers can not be made & help approaches
use mylar or mirror reflector or whistle or bright
coloured jacket or any colourful contrasting moving object
to attract eyes.

SIGNAL CAUTION:

Many a marooned person has danced of joy as rescue ship
cruises overhead only to sink into despair as it passes by.

To avoid this one MUST master signal & be ready to get
them seen when rescue comes near by. So you MUST rig
emergency signals as soon as you can.

SUMMER TIME:

Messages may be spelled out with sod blocks, logs or
rocks.

The more different variety of messages the better, from
smoke pot to flares, to mirror to waving arms, gun shots
"3 in a row" yet don't waste ammunition.

Signification       Morse                    Semaphore

Calling:            AAA  *+*+*+              Flag at 8pm right

Wait:               AS   *+**                AS

Ready to receive:   K  +*+                   K
(go ahead Dick)

Understood:         T  +                     (lite/flag)

C:             (after each word)             (sound = nothing)

Repeat:             (2nd) UD  **++**         Wait

Annul (error!):          EEE  ***  ***  *** Annul

End of message:          AR *+*+*            AR

Received =          R  *+*                   R

Slow down:          MD +++**                 MD 
2              Signalization speed

From =              DE  DE  +****            DE

R =                 affirmative R  *+*       R

Message Break =          BT +***+            BT

STOP/REPEAT = INT    **+*+                   INT

REPEAT IMI =        **++**                   IMI

ALL AFTER =         AA  *+*+                 AA

ALL BEFORE          AB *++***                AB

 
