          WARNING!  WARNING!  WARNING!

Note of the co-author this is not the final txt far from it
in fact it will be done over the years, this particular file
deals mostly with psychological items although I have included a
bit of the others to show you some elements which will be
discussed. Thanks for your support and understanding.

     ANY OTHER TIPS WHICH YOU MAY HAVE SEND THEM UP TO:
               richard@io.org


                         SURVIVAL BIBLE

                               OR 

                         SURVIVAL.ZIP

                FROM 2001-BC  TO 2001 AD!
                1001 SURVIVAL TECHNIQUES TIPS
                & TRICKS ON ALL CLIMATES AND
              CONDITONS. OVER 67 BOOKS INTO 1!
              COMPILED OVER THE LAST 17 YEARS!
     
               FROM  SIR BADEN POWEL TO SAS & BACK!
               OR TO SIR  WITH LOVE! & ALL FREE-WARE

                    1 MAIN LAW OF SURVIVAL IS:

ONE OF THE  MAIN LAW OF TRAVEL and SURVIVAL IS THIS: 

THE MORE YOU TRY TO UNDERSTAND AN ENVIRONMENT AND THE LESS YOU
TRY TO FIGHT IT, THE KINDER IT WILL BE TO YOU.

                         PSYCHOLOGY #2:

WHILE IT IS TRUE AND VITAL THAT ENERGY MUST BE CONSERVED!
IT IS EQUALLY IMPORTANT THAT THE MIND MUST BE KEPT BUSY.

Experiment with new ideas and new principles. Although emergency
packs are most helpful it is of equal importance to know how to
use all the equipment along with what nature has provided.

ENDURANCE IS NOT ENOUGH:

This has been proven over and over again. One needs training and
if at all possible one MUST have his S/Kit on him. One can not
defeat cold, hunger, isolation etc by sitting on his hands!

One must know what to do, he must equip himself, mentally &
physically. There are perhaps still a few realists. No Rambo!

ACCIDENTS WANTED!:

An unhealthy proportion of accidents occur because deep down
underneath, someone wants them to happen. A mishap may be a
face-saving excuses for some failure.

VERY OFTEN IT IS DELIBERATELY WILLED BECAUSE THE INDIVIDUAL
BELIEVES HE OR SHE SHOULD BE PUNISHED.

Now and then an accident offers the simplest excuse to escape
responsibility. Some use a misadventure as the easiest way to
attract attention. 

But once someone definitely realize that he cannot afford an
accident, the percentage line up heavily against the probability
of one overtaking him.

IF YOU WANT TO SURVIVE YOU MOST LIKELY WILL IF NOT; THEN YOU
WONT! 

This is why it has been seen that people will deliberately
destroy good equipment whereas other will improvise to survive
and help others.

CONSERVATION OF HEAT & ENERGY:

CONSERVATION OF  HEAT & ENERGY IS ESSENTIAL TO SURVIVAL UNDER
PRIMITIVE CONDITIONS.

The task of supplying oneself with food and water, constructing
shelter and needed utensils is a full time exhausting job under
the best of conditions.

Hard work requires adequate fuel for the body and in the
primitive life the attainment of food and water is tiring. It is
a vicious circle that NEVER relents.

The "lazy" native has by necessities learned to satisfy his basic
needs in what appears to be an easy going way.

BURN 1/2 BOOK  AS TINDER!:

In case of survival 1/2 this book could be used to start a fire
as tinder material, when one is lost in the desert, the jungle or
artic chapter are mostly useless, so go for it.

FIRST RULE OF SURVIVAL IS: 

TO TAKE IT EASY and MAKE TASK LIGHT. (Even Budd lite?!?)

SURVIVAL PRINCIPLES:

YOU COULD RESUME THEM INTO 1 SIMPLE QUESTION:

WHAT DO I NEED MOST AND HOW TO GO ABOUT GETTING IT? 

Of course one MUST realise the relative utility of each thing and
its value.

Experiences will teach you this & REMEMBER that it is not
important to succeed over a trial so much as what lesson you get
from it.

For instance one MUST know by now that with enough water one 
can easily survive 1 month in the forest even without food.

Theory is 1 thing and practice quite another. After a while
either the hunger occupies all your thought or it becomes
irrelevant,  or of no importance at all.

You will discover that after the second day it is easier and
easier to fast till you come to the point that you realise that
only death can stop the fasting.

By trial and experience you will find your limit of your power
and will as well as you physical endurance and limitations.

Once you have conquered your fear and its ghost then you can
survive, most of the time it is not the danger but the fear that
paralyse most of us from doing any survival actions.

HOW TO BREATH PROPERLY:

It sounds strange but we have to learn to breath properly.

MEANING THAT ONE MUST EXHALE COMPLETELY! IF ONE WANTS TO USE ITS
MAXIMUM STRENGTH.

A breathing control is aimed towards our ways to Exhale and Not
about inhaling. 

ONE REBUILDS HIS STRENGTH MUCH BETTER BY EXHALING PROPERLY THAN
BY TRYING TO FORCE HIS AIR INTAKE.

IF YOU DO ANY HARD WORK, OR WALK FAST OR YOU ARE DIGGING? 

YOUR OUTPUT WILL INCREASE BY 50%,  IF YOU APPLY YOURSELF BY
SLOWLY, EXHALING; BY PUSHING ALL THE AIR OUT OF YOUR LUNGS.

Opera singers, swimmers and runners know this trick. For example
if you get into a cold shower, you have the tendency to breath
faster and to tense your muscles which only aggravates your
torture.

If on the other hand you try to exhale slowly and regularly you
will be much surprised to notice the Little effect that this cold
water has upon you. Ahhh Riiight!

This is because a Slow Exhalation helps your body to adapt itself
to this change.

STRESS CONTROL and BREATHING:

A attentive control on your respiration and especially of your
timing contributes to your stress control in any moments of
tension, stress or #contrainte#. Most of us breath only half way.

We breath incorrectly since we don't have much choice but where
we make the mistake is we don't exhale properly, meaning that we
don't do it deeply enough. Thus we often sigh which is a sign
warning us of a Need for a Deep Exhalation.

A sigh is a natural mean used by our body to exhale completely
once we have neglected to do so under stress. A sigh is a natural
mean used by our body to exhale completely once we have neglected
to do so under Stress.

Just REMEMBER in your past when there was a deep stress and after
that moment was over you felt the deer need for a full
exhalation.

So one MUST learn to sigh methodically. Any blockage brought to
your breathing system provokes deep pains!  So any amelioration
will be beneficial to your body and mind.

The more one exhale air the more one is able to inhale. So the
increasing of your capacity is the goal of any respiratory
discipline.

To take a conscious hold of your exhalation is the # 1 factor.
What we MUST strive for is to make it an habit.

BREATHING BEFORE ANY TASK!

EXHALE DEEPLY BEFORE!!! UNDERTAKING ANY TASK.

You will thus facilitate the climbing of a long stairs. Exercise
yourself to breath in during 2 steps and to exhale during the
next 2 steps.

2 IN and 2 OUT DEEPLY.  

BUT YOU MUST EXHALE COMPLETELY BEFORE! CLIMBING THE FIRST STEP.

BREATHING TO FIGHT COLD!: 

6 DEEP EXHALATIONS WILL SUSTAIN AND INCREASE YOUR RESISTANCE BY
50% AT LEAST  WHEN YOU WILL HAVE TO FIGHT AGAINST A  WINTER WIND!

STRESS CONTROL:

In any Harsh or Boring circumstances where Stress puts a grip on
you, Exhale Slowly thus you will Recharge your Nervous System.
Hummm!

BREATHING CONTROL EXERCISES:

To help you along in this new technique, try reading out loud is
a good exercise. Take an article and read on one breath as much
as you can without effort.

Do this a dozen time the first day. Count the words and start
over the next day, this way you can measure your improvement.

Another exercise is to count. Sit down comfortably, your back
straight, inhale slowly and regularly counting to 4, pause for 1
seconde then exhale till you reach 12, the next time inhale till
5 and exhale till 15.

Keep it up this way and measure your progress. Once you have
reached 21 you will notice that the fact of humming a song will
help you enormously in limiting the quantity of air you exhale.

These exercise will bring much good to your overall well being
and will change many of your regular habits. 

A conscious breathing also brings a conscious acting or behaving.
You will notice that it is impossible to slump in a coach and
still breath effectively.

All one has to do is to get his shoulder blades as close together
as possible to feel your lungs getting to work at their best.

After a while these exercise will become second nature for an
overall better well being. It could even help you cutting down on
smoking by reducing the stess overhall!

Just REMEMBER: " DEEP 6 "

1 MAIN LAW OF SURVIVAL:

THE MORE YOU TRY TO UNDERSTAND AN ENVIRONMENT and THE LESS YOU
TRY TO FIGHT IT, THE KINDER IT WILL BE TO YOU.

PSYCHOLOGY #?:

While it is true and vital that energy MUST be conserved it is
equally important that the mind MUST BE KEPT BUSY.

ENDURANCE IS NOT ENOUGH:

This has been proven over & over again. 1 needs training.

One MUST know what to do. One MUST equip himself, mentally and
physically. If you want to survive you most likely will. If not;
then you wont! 

CONSERVATION OF ENERGY:

CONSERVATION OF ENERGY IS ESSENTIAL TO SURVIVAL UNDER ANY
PRIMITIVE CONDITIONS.

IF LOST RELAX: !!!

1)   CONSERVE STRENGTH, FLUID,
     heat, by moving as little as possible and SLOWLY!
 
2)   PREPARE EMERGENCY SIGNALS
     make shelter, inventory supplies, ration all food.

3)   GUARD against Infections, intestinal disorders.

4)   DON'T TRAVEL in adverse weather,
     IF injured or confused. Eventually someone will find you.

5)   STAY WITH DOWN AIRCRAFT, easily spotted. Determine your
     location, scout immediate area.

6)   DECIDE IF BEST TO TRAVEL OR STAY.

Don't separate parties; mark your path, leave messages behind,
keep a log.

7)   KEEP knife, spare food, first/aid, signal
     equipment ON YOU at ALL TIME!
 
DOWNHILL TRAVEL:

Travel along watersheds may triple distance, lead to marshes,
thickets etc. STRAIGHT LINE travel may be best.

TEST for EXHAUSTION:

Look up at sky, if it appears to be receding get some sleep.

ATTITUDE FOR SURVIVAL:

A perron's chance of having a proper attitude to survive are
attained by: 

TRAINING & DRILLING FOR SURVIVAL:

The mental attitude that: It can't happen to meee! is dangerous
in that the individual will not accept the situation as it exists
and is blind to reality. (Ostrich way).

A great number of incidents have been recorded which indicate
that previous rehearsal both mental and actual of emergency
procedures usually result in automatic action on the part of the
individual when crisis occurs.

Failure to have an attitude of survival may result in panic, even
in person who usually are calm, and appear collected

7 ENEMIES OF SURVIVAL:

PAIN, COLD, THIRST, FATIGUE, BOREDOM and LONELINESS!

We all have experienced these but few have known them, to the
extent where our survival has been threatened.

DANGERS EVALUATION VARY ACCORDING TO:

Individuals, Experiences, Conditions etc. and Training. Ex: To a
citizen traffic zigzag is nothing but to a native it is very
dangerous.

DANGER EXIST MOST OFTEN IN THE CONCEPTION OF IT: RATHER THAN THE
REALITY ITSELF.

The Question of survival in one case or the other is a question
of:  ADAPTATION!

So for the citizen he has to feel at home in the bush, then his
survival is assured.

Hunters lost in forest have noticed that fear and loneliness
start on them as soon as the sun goes down.

As long as the sun or daylite is up they are less worried but
comes darkness his tension goes up, they rush, run and get all
tired.

THIS PANIC KILLS MORE THAN 90% OF ALL LOST PERSONS.

So we MUST adapt physically and mentally to this new situation.
If we succeed to get a certain physical comfort then the moral
security will follow.

FEAR IS MADE OF IGNORANCE:

Knowledge of the wood and its mysteries can get rid of this fear
of survival. This is what we try to show you in all different
situations.

KNOWLEDGE and FORETHOUGHT COMBINED are your BEST SURVIVAL TOOL:
FOR YOU AND LOVED ONES.

FIRST RULE OF SURVIVAL IS: 

TO TAKE IT EASY and MAKE TASK LIGHT.

PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF SURVIVAL:

1 OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PSYCHOLOGICAL NECESSITY FOR SURVIVAL IS:

THE CAPACITY TO ACCEPT IMMEDIATELY THE REALITY OF THE CRITICAL
SITUATION WE ARE IN & TO REACT ACCORDINGLY! DEADLY TO DO THE
OSTRICH!

Fear can kill or better your chances of survival. Yet no Rambo -
Zorro stuff! Prudence and patience pays!

NO USE TO TRY TO WIPE OUT FEAR 
BY NEGATING THE DANGER! NO!!!

ONE CAN ALWAYS BETTER  UP THE SITUATION HE FINDS HIMSELF INTO.

Accepting fear as a normal reaction in front of danger will bring
you to react methodically rather then impulsively thus:

WILL INCREASE ENORMOUSLY!  YOUR SURVIVAL CHANCES.

THE WAY A MAN REACT TO FEAR?!?  DEPENDS MORE OF HIMSELF!
                    THEN SITUATION ITSELF!

It is not ALWAYS the physically strongest men nor the aggressive
one nor the careless ones who react best to fear.

Shy or fearsome people can react more calmly and surely under
this tension of fear and have better survival chances.

ONE MUST ADMIT FEAR, LIVE WITH IT AND IF POSSIBLE USE IT TO HIS
ADVANTAGE.

All true soldiers will tell you they have known fear even JESUS!
Even satan.

FEAR:

IS NOT TO BE ASHAMED OF, IT IS NOT A FAULT!

BUT NATURAL REACTION TO THE UNKNOWN. EVEN  JESUS CHRIST 
KNEW FEAR BUT HE CONQUORED IT.

ONE WAY TO  FIGHT FEAR IS: 
TO ACCEPT IT AND LIVE WITH IT, JUST LIKE A BAD COLD - DDD!

FACTORS which will INCREASE FEAR =: 

     POWERLESSNESS and DESPAIR.

However it was found that:

FACTORS WHICH DECREASE FEAR WERE:

1)   The fact to have faith in the individual equipment.

2)   The faith in the technical knowledge of the immediate
     superior.

3)    Concentration on the task to do..
4)    TRUST IN PROVIDENCE / GOD

ONE MAY WONDER WHAT TRUST IN GOD HAS TO DO WITH SURVIVAL YET IT
IS A  TRUE FACT THAT IT DID & DOES HELPS GREATLY FOR THOSE WHO
HAVE THIS TRUST.

PANIC and FEAR:

FEAR OF UNKNOWN, OF PAIN, OF WORRIES  OF YOUR OWN INABILITIES
ETC. 

FEAR IS NORMAL UNDER CRISIS BUT ALSO SALUTARY.

IT SHARPENS YOUR INTUITION AND PREPARE YOUR INSTINCT TO REACT

IF FEAR IS NOT PROPERLY CHANNELLED IT LEADS TO PANIC &
TO DESPAIR, TO A BREAK DOWN  OF YOUR WILL TO SURVIVE & TO ADDED
SUFFERINGS EVEN DEATH.

MANY POSITIVE WAYS CAN BE TAKEN  TO MAKE FEAR AN ALLY! AND ANNIHL
PANIC.:

As mentioned above, the psychological preparation and technical
knowledge to survival will increase your faith in yourself and in
the environment.

Also, it is of FIRST IMPORTANCE TO IMMEDIATELY ATTACH YOUR MIND
TO STUDY THE SITUATION and OF THE ACTIONS NEEDED TO BE TAKEN IN
THAT CRISIS. (No ostrich attitude /no Rambo stuff!)

The more you concentrate on doing a task the more you minimise
fear and danger of panic.

WHAT TO DO:

1)   Study the situation. Am I hurt or others? What measures of
first-aid can be taken? 

What is the gravity of the wounds? What are the immediate
dangers? Am I close to water and food supply? 

What is the weather? Conditions of the terrain?
What could I find around to help me survive.

2)   No use to Rush! Don't go in haste without goals nor
reflection, until you are  fully conscious of your situation.

IT IS CAPITAL TO SAVE YOUR ENERGIES, &  STRENGTH:

In survival energy is infinitely precious and time unless medical
emergency is much less important.

Don't get physically tired unless you have a well thought of plan
& a specific task to do (fire etc.)

Think first, act later. To rush in vain can bring an impression
of inability which BRINGS TO PANIC INVARIABLY.

3)   Retracing your starting point.

Most likely you will have to search, examine and get away from
your drop point. 

To get familiar with your new environment will give you security.

Nothing is more demoralising in survival then to lose yourself
again from your drop point & not being able to go back to camp.

So examine well the surrounding, the topography and specially
keep well in memory even write if you can, your discoveries, when
you leave "camp" or starting point, drop along the way,
guiding-marks, (easy to see), which will help your coming back.

Whatever your distress and isolation feelings, you MUST know
where you are, 

Even if it is only to take conscience of your environment. By
doing so you will increase your chances to be rescued.

4)   HOW  TO CONQUER FEAR & PANIC. 

BY KNOWING THE EFFECT OF FEAR AND PANIC YOU WILL DIMINISH THE
DANGER.

Test it and analyse the results.

5)   IMPROVISE!

No, matter where you are, you will ALWAYS discover inside your
immediate surrounding of activities many means to Help you
survive.

The more you will be creative,  imaginative, the more you will
feel recomforted and encouraged.

You MUST then modify your reference system. A tree is no more a
tree but a possible food and fire source, it can also become a
shelter even clothing.

Get familiar with your surrounding and miraculously your spirit
will transform nature in all kinds of survival instruments.

6)   VALUE LIFE!

 In survival your will to survive will be stressed severely. When
this will disappear all the technical know how becomes useless.

SO DON'T TAKE USELESS RISKS! BECAUSE YOU ARE THE ONLY KEY TO YOUR
SURVIVAL! (Ooopppsss!)

To take unnecessary risk could bring you injuries and others etc.
which would reduce your efficiency.

7)   REACT AS NATIVE. 

Even in the farthest regions, it is possible to find peoples. You
MUST however approach them with prudence and courtesy. (Prudent
as a snake and gentle as dove!)

They know the land and can show you where you can find water,
food, shelter and roads to civilization. DO not to offend them
nor displease them. They can save your life!

FEAR; OUR GREATEST ENNEMY ! AND BEST FRIEND!:  (part 2 ?!?)

YOUR GREATEST ENEMY IS NOT: COLD, HUNGER, CLIMATE, TERRAIN 
                    BUT FEAR!

Which can paralyse you into passive acceptance of your fate or it
can shock you into panic.

HOWEVER IT WILL DO NEITHER IF YOU REMEMBER THESE PRINCIPLES OF
SURVIVALS: 

FACE THE FACTS--MAKE A PLAN "BAD PLAN IS BETTER THEN NO PLAN!

GOOD PLANS COME FROM TRAINING" KEEP BUSY AND KEEP TRYING.

IN SHORT YOUR # 1 DEPENDABLE ANTIDOTE  TO ANXIETY  OR FEAR
WILL BE; PURPOSEFUL ACTIVITY.

While I prepared this book from many other people experiences and
tragedies who got caught in earthquake, snowstorm, floods etc. I
realised that the:

5 MAIN CAUSES OF DEATH WERE =:

CARELESSNESS, FAULTY & INADEQUATE EQUIPMENT, PANIC AND COMPLETELY
WRONG BEHAVIOUR!

KNOWLEDGE IS POWER:

This why knowledge and training helps so much. So be realist,
learn ahead and enjoy it. There still maybe a few realists out
there!

We have prepared this book for you to have fun while learning and
should you or your love ones be caught in a jam, well you will
through all those informations be able to better ALL your
chances.

Don't forget GOD, He is there also to help you along.
(FEAR NOT SAID JESUS I HAVE CONQUERED THE WORLD)

NEVER TO GIVE UP HOPE! 

SURVIVAL IS AN ALL OR NONE PROPOSITION!:

The alternative is death. The success is here as elsewhere, lies
in having good equipment, knowing how to use it and proper mental
attitude. (Some are tempermental others  mostly mentals?!?)

NEVER GIVE UP HOPE. As the bible says: "TRUST IN THE LORD!"

7 ENEMIES OF SURVIVAL:

The more you know of your enemies, better are your chances to
conquer them rather then being dominated by them. (1 LAW OF WAR)

PAIN: 

Nature use pain to warn you of a problem, but nature also has
means to remove pain. This occur when one is to busy on doing
things to have time to put attention on your wounds. Pain can
nearly go away if your mind is occupied in fighting for survival.

On the other hand when you draw attention on your pain it will
weaken your will to survive.

If one does not keep guard the pain will eventually kill your
resistance, even if the pain is not serious nor long lasting.

COLD:

Cold is a greater enemy then it appears. Not only does cold
diminish your intellectual capacities, but also undermine your
will to the point you only think of getting warm.

Cold is a insidious enemy which creeps on your body and spirit
and weakens your will of survival.

Having difficulties to move and that you want to sleep in order
to forget your main goal = SURVIVAL.

As for pain and cold, one can nearly forget thirst if one if
sufficiently determined to survive.

THIRST:

Another enemy which even when not too grand will weaken your
thoughts. It is also important to REMEMBER not to deprive
yourself of water without necessity.

One can dehydrate himself dangerously in his struggle for
survival, even when water is abundant.

The need to drink applies also in the cold temperature even
though one may think he does not need it as much as the desert.

HUNGER:

It has danger on your reasoning, hunger weakens a person faculty
of thinking rationally. Thirst and hunger will diminish your
resistance to cold, pain and fear.

FATIGUE:

Even when moderate, it can sensibly reduce your mental
capacities. Fatigue can make you neglectful, you become more and
more indifferent. It is one of the most serious danger for your
struggle of survival.

TEST for EXHAUSTION:

Look up at sky, if it appears to be receding get some sleep.

IT IS A FALSE IDEA THAT FATIGUE IS ONLY CAUSED BY PHYSICAL
EFFORT.

Sure there is a real danger from over exhaustion, but it is
equally true that fatigue can be caused by:

Despair, lack of determination, insatisfaction, frustration or
boredom.

FATIGUE:

Can be used as a mean to escape a situation which has become too
painful.

Once you have determine the dangers of a situation one can nearly
ALWAYS gather his strength and keep on fighting.

LONELINESS & BOREDOM:

Represent 2 of the most dangerous enemies for survival. They are
dangerous because they suddenly appear without warning.

When nothing is happening, when you hope and nothing comes along,
when you MUST stay put, calm, tranquil and alone, then those
feelings creep in.

This is why one MUST also use his faith and prayers to help him
fight these feelings, which if not fought can bring death by
despair.

LONELINESS AND BOREDOM ARE 1/2 BROTHER OF FEAR AND PANIC.

They creep slowly on you, specially after the first tasks are
done and that the basic satisfaction for food, water, fire,
shelter are assured.

They bring you to depression and weaken your will to survive.
They require the same ANTIDOTE: define your priorities, and
accomplish the needed tasks.

Many purposefull activities and plenty of talk to see how to best
do it, to save energy and to be efficient. 

Two head are better than 1 and cooperation is essential if you
are dealing with others. "UNITED WE STAND!"

Hope for the Best but be ready for the worst if it comes. To
prepare a program, a plan secures and occupy the mind. Think
time!

Start upon big project such as construction of a "permanent"
shelter, ( Pyramid ) Start a series of daily tasks, even plan
long ones, but be busy in mind and body, mostly in mind to start
with. Of course this means you have already assumed your survival
for food, water, etc.

OSTRICH ATTITUDE #2: vrpt**

 Your chances of survival can be greatly compromised when you say
to yourself: This can not happen to ME. "eee!" 

Such thought will hide the reality of the situation and in front
of the danger.

IT WILL PUT YOU IN THE IMPOSSIBILITY TO REACT PROPERLY!

LEARN FROM OTHERS!:

This book is made from over 50 authors & 1001 persons, and from
2001 years BC- to 2001 AD of experiences in SURVIVAL.

 We know of many past experience showing that a previous
preparation mentally or physically on what to do in case of
emergency can condition man to react instinctively in case of
need.

The fact to be unprepared mentally to survival provokes panic
even on people who seem calm on normal conditions.

Knowledge and repeated practice of the measure to adopt in case
of emergency give not only faith in yourself and the feeling to
be prepared in case of survival, but they can also act
automatically when the victim is in a half conscious state in
critical state.

PRAYERS: ???????

Many castaways have found help and comfort from prayer. Believers
of course would pray to God from the first day of their ordeal
but even some sceptics admit that the attempt to pray fortified
them at the last moment and restored their mental balance.

Admiral Byrd noted in his snow hole that:  "The human race then
is not alone in the universe. Tough I am cut off from the human
race, I am not alone". Belief in, its the one point where all the
religion agree. It's been called various name. Many call it God.
(There is but One God!)

WILL TO SURVIVE:

It has often been seen that after having been rescued and treated
from all kind of sufferings some people would let themselves
slowly die in hospital beds.

Those people had lost the taste and will to survive. Experiences
from 100ds of soldiers in second world war, Corea, Vietnam etc. 

PROVE US THAT SURVIVAL IS BEFORE ANYTHING ELSE AN ATTITUDE WAY OF
LIFE:

In those crisis, wether you are alone or in group you will know
problems of all kind: emotional from fear, despair loneliness and
boredom beside wounds, pain, fatigue, hunger, thirst which will
diminish your will to survive.

If you are not mentally prepared to overcome all obstacles and to
face the possible worst to come, your chances to get out alive in
those crisis are greatly reduce.

IT IS A STATE OF MIND AFFAIR:

After having interviewed thousands of concentrations camps
survivors from the second WW, experts came to face the
astonishing capacity to bounce back that the human organism carry
in himself, when the spirit takes the override on charge.

Our bodies are infinitely complex machines and even under the
harshest and most degrading conditions.

It can maintain itself in function by its desire to live. After a
certain while the energy needs that the body fills with food are
practically reduce to zero.

Concentrations camps survivors were saying that; for them even
under the most abject, vile and inhuman circumstances, life was
worth living. Many have survived ONLY because they had this state
of mind.

RESCUE:

It is when you believe that you will be rescued that your will
and resistance will be stressed even more.

For exemple you see, the boat or plane that is coming and that
they don't see you, you will be then, fill with despair.

 Don't fall into despair, it is sure that other ships or planes
will be coming. If the planes are flying in circles, it means
they are looking for you.

It is then that you MUST put all your efforts together and put
all your survival technic (signals) in the only goal, to be seen,
when the plane or ship reappears. Reassure yourself, they will be
back.  

SURVIVAL MEANS: NEVER GIVE UP HOPE. TRY & TRY AGAIN & AGAIN.
NO PRIMA DONA ON EXPEDITIONS: 

If ever you find yourself in the position of leading an
expedition your first rule should be that all members are equal
and equally responsible for looking after themselves.

There is no room for prima donnas on an expedition. Here we don't
talk about the sick or dying or wounded but the well fit even if
hungry.

Human nature being what it is, many in good health will use any
or make up excuses to become lazy or to play prima donna.

When people are tired, uncomfortable and a bit frightened by
their strange surroundings, they will suddenly become petulant
and demanding of their fellows and behave worst than children
even in a way they would NEVER dream of at home.
This of course has a dreadful effect on morale so that everyone
ends up screaming at each other or at the cook or camp-master.

It is a well known fact that when there is no chief, the mob
turns ugly & in riot. 

The crowd will ALWAYS prefer a dictator rather then anarchy. A
smart dictator know that and he will create anarchy so that he
can take over quickly as a saviour of the people, hitler did just
that, we saw the result.

So kick ass and make them work, not as a dictator so much but as
a leader who if he is not taking charge and make them cooperate
and behave correctly,it will be the end of the survival group
entirely

This may sound harsh but it is the result of known behaviour from
survivors and other experts in the field of group behaviour.

GROUP BEHAVIOUR IN SURVIVAL: 

A CREW'S CHANCES OF SURVIVAL ARE LARGELY DUE TO THE ABILITY TO
ORGANISE ACTIONS.

While an emergency might be expected to weld a group together, in
most cases; " United we stand and divided we fall."

UNLESS a Leader attempts to plan, examine the situation, gets
information and helps from his mates, then organise TOGETHER,
otherwise: Panic takes over. 

So, stop! Sit down! Think??  See, smell, hear, feel your new
environement. Then:  Start a plan on how? To act best, safely,
efficiently ? 5 W's = What / where / when / how / why of any
situations?  

MOST LAZY WAY, TO SAVE ENERGY = THE BEST in SURVIVAL.

GROUP BEHAVIOUR IN THE STRUGGLE FOR SURVIVAL: # 2

Chances for group survival depends greatly in the men's aptitude
to keep busy. Danger does not contribute to unify the team but
the reverse.

The more a situation is difficult and confused the greater the
problems for the team. It is generally what occurs when comes a
common danger. Fear tends to provoke panic rather then
concentration of efforts in a common goal.

GROUP MORAL:

When team members have a strong bond rather then act as
individuals and that they are proud of their team then their
moral is way up. This factor has great advantages:

A)   The man feels supported & protected, because he knows that
     his survival depends of people whom he trust.

B)   In case of defeat, the team can face up the situation with
     more tenacity.

C)   The team can fix goals to help one another and face
     tomorrow.

It is not only external pressures which MUST create a high moral
but also the togetherness feeling in the group.

In some occasion the mood and state of mind of some persons can
become very contagious.

We can often stop panic by acting with determination, with the
help of organisation and well established.

Organisation, which foresees the delegation of authorities and
sharing of responsibilities. In order to get that, all team
members MUST have faith in the team and recognise:

The ABSOLUTE NECESSITY TO COOPERATE. TOGETHER WE STAND AND
DIVIDED WE FALL.

IMPORTANT FACTORS TO OBTAIN IN GROUP SURVIVAL: *

THE ABSOLUTE NECESSITY TO COOPERATE CAN NOT BE OVER EMPHASIZE. 
"Divided we fall"

Goals Organisation; methodical action comes when the team members
know what to do and when to do it, in normal and emergency time.

To achieve this, 1 of the most important mean is: 

A)   To keep the team well informed.

B)   Use of Competences: In good groups, to do the right job you
need the right man. To each his own specialty helps alot.

C)   To know how to accept suggestions and critics. Even if the
leader has the final decision he MUST also take in consideration
the suggestions and critics of his men.  

D)   Decision spirit: Hundreds of past stories show that we have
rarely all the needed time wanted to take decisions.

The success of survival operation is usually due to on the spot
decisions and to put into actions immediately!

E)   Equipment Verification:  In more cases then we can imagine
the fact of not having checked the equipment led to failure in
survival operation.

F)   Situation appraisal: Generally we admit that to solve a
     problem we MUST study it beforehand.

It is often what we ignore that we fear most. Situation appraisal
permits to eliminate those unknown and prepare our strength to
adapt to it.  

G)   Knowledge and aptitudes in matter of survival will greatly
increase our faith in our capacities to survive.

H)   Quick reflexes: It is important to know ahead the type of
reflex of the men. This knowledge permits the group to react fast
in critical situations.

I)   Principal goal of training a team in survival is to give you
this occasion to know and understand the reflex of the persons
which they have to acquire as a team acting as one man show. (To
get the winning edge)

GROUP SURVIVAL:

Small groups of men showed least tendency of giving up hope and
(think of suicide) because a close human contact between them had
grown up in the first days of their common ordeal.

In larger groups thought of suicide may be almost as common as
with isolated individuals, for individuals can feel just as
lonely in a motley crowd thrown together by fate.

Pills for influencing emotions might possibly help castaways for
instance over the worst of all psychological torments =
Loneliness.

THE COUNTLESS VOLUNTEERS WHO HAVE SUBMITTED TO EVERY KIND OF
ORDEAL IN LABORATORIES ARE UNANIMOUS THAT THE ISOLATION TEST IS
THE WORST OF ALL.

DISCIPLINE IS A MUST:

If there is no discipline among a group of castaways; MORAL SINKS
ABRUPTLY & WITH IT THE CHANCES OF SURVIVAL.

When everybody does as he likes and simply lives aimlessly for
the day, energy is squandered  with the same work being done 2 or
3 times over because there has been no planning first.

Precious articles of equipment are destroyed by malice or
carelessness.

On occasions the complete disorganisation of an undisciplined
crowd may cost lives and even lead to murder.

Psychological factors contributing to the survival of groups or
individuals castaways are now being studied as intensively as 
what these men ate or drank. ( ie: this books has 25 pages on
pysho-survival alone)  

For instance it has been found that chances of survival were
fairly good in all groups when someone in the group (perhaps an
officer) took command, drew up work schedule and told everybody
what his job was.

Instead of inactive sitting and waiting for rescue, everyone now
had a function to fulfil, there was less time for brooding.
Most people would rather obey then command, rather be led then
lead!

So they are usually glad when someone else assumes this
responsibility and are quite ready to fall in with his orders.

It may be one of the weakest members of a group who suddenly
takes charge, driven by some inner power inexplicable even to
himself.

They have instinctively realised that castaways MUST be occupied
and MUST do something, instead of just going sitting about in the
boat, apathetic, shivering, frightened and ready to die.

GROUP SURVIVAL:

A group can be a help just as a risk. The strength of a chain
depends upon the strength of the weakest link.

1 DESTRUCTIVE FACTOR IN A GROUP = 

DISSENSION WHICH YOU MUST AVOID THIS AT ALL COST! 

Maybe one way is to walk away if you can. it is better to back
off at time too. No place for pride; when life is at stake!  

In crisis, reactions of the group or the individual become
automatic. Groups who can unite their efforts and give themselves
good leaders increase their chances. Divided we fall! United we
stand! 

IF THERE IS NO CHIEF; ELECT ONE:
In groups of 10 then 100 then 1,000. In order to gain a good
control the group MUST do this:

1) Organise activities in function of the group survival.  2)
Elect a chief  3) Create a climate of unity. (United we stand!)

WE ALL NEED ONE ANOTHER!

1)   Whenever possible take decision under the chief direction
     and in collaboration with him.

2)   In other cases, whatever is the situation.

THE CHIEF DECIDES HIS ORDERS ARE NEVER NEVER DISCUSSED. 
          YES$S BOS$S!

PERSONAL QUALITIES NECESSARIES TO SURVIVAL:

Survival can depend more of the personality then of the danger
itself, or of the weather conditions  or of the terrain or even
the type of critical situation

It is ALWAYS one's personality which will make him resist or fail
to fatigue; also permits him to take the necessary measures for
survival, even to make him move his feet.

1)   He MUST be a man who can make up his mind, decide and act.

2)  He MUST be inventive, smart, using imagination.
     (Images-in-Nations!?!)

3)   He MUST be able to stay alone. Certain person can not stay
     by themselves, they need to be together.

4)   He can adapt to a situation. Certain person refuse to change
     no matter whatever price to pay for their stubbornness.

5)   He MUST keep a cool head, stay calm and master himself.

6)   He hopes all will get better, but prepare for the worst.

7)   He is patient. Some want to act immediately, others know to
     wait for a better occasion to rise up.

8)   He has endurance. Few people know all that they can really
put up with in reality, but when you expect a difficult
situation, we are better ready to face the worst that can happen.

9)   He can evaluate others. Some can displease everybody, others
     can be liked by all.

This comes from the attitude of taking in consideration of the
mood and feelings of others.

This attitude to understand others and to foresee their reactions
is of great importance in group survival.

10)  He knows where his fears and worries come from, some from
his past some from the situation he faces, or the future, thus he
can better overcome it when he know its origin.

Ex: Fears from childhood. As soon as a survivor decides to better
his state and conditions he reenforce his moral and will to
survive.

OFTEN THE DANGER EXIST IN THE IMAGINATION OF MEN ONLY!?!

SOME PERSONAL REQUIREMENTS OF SURVIVAL:  (It helps!)

The personality of a person will have more to do with survival
than danger, weather, terrain, conditions, nature of the
emergency, the following qualities are important:

THE ABILITY TO:

1)   Make up his Mind.
2)   Improvise, imaginations, 
3)   Live up alone and others 

4)   Adapt to a situation.
5)   Keep cool and Edit Calm, Collected, Strength, Gentle! 
6)   Hope for the Best, and Prepare for the Worst! 

7)   Ability to take it! 
8)   Have patience and Faith in GOD!
9)   Figure out the other man's thoughts.

10)  To have compassion to realise where special fears and 
worries come from  how they could suppressed or dodge.

11)  Some prayers might and would help to calm down and ease the
pains.

12)  NEVER UNDERESTIMATE, THE POWER, LOVE, MERCY OF GOD!    
     TRUST IN THE LORD"

SURVIVAL PREPARATION:

Beside psychological preparation, you MUST also face the fact
that we are heading for some very hard time.

So help yourselves and others by having with you, in your car,
home, plane or boat this survival bible along with a Survival
Kit.

Read it and try to memorise as much as possible instead of TV
wasting time. Get your family along and practice different things
in this book, it will be an excellent mean to learn and to get
your family together.

NATIVE HELP: 

Here are some tips to help you gain their help

1)   Let the native establish first contact, exchange with the
     one who seem to be the chief.

2)   Be friendly.courteous, patient, do not show fear, nor
     weapons.

3)    Respect their ways of life.

4)    Respect all their personal belonging (NO steal? No
     breaking!)

5)   In most tribes it is men who are BOSS?!?  As much as
possible avoid all direct contacts or communications with women.

6)   Natives can give you precious advice for boats and how to
get food and water. Listen well and act as such, thus  better    
our own chances for survival in their regions.

7)   Avoid all sudden and impulsive physical contacts.

8)   Money is of no value to them, however they are interested in
change, matches, tobacco, salt, razor blades, empty containers,
etc. you can use in a barter system.

9)    Leave a good impression, others after you may need it.

10)  Study the basic know how. It is by doing this book not just
reading it. The more you will use it the better you'll know.

SLEEPING NOTE: 

IT IS SAID; THAT THE SLEEPING HOURS BEFORE MIDNIGHT COUNT FOR
DOUBLE TIME. IT IS ABSOLUTELY EXACT.

Not because those hours have any magical properties but because
those who go to bed late add to the normal fatigue, this is what
doctors call over fatigue.

LOG BOOK VITAL BOOK: 

A Log Book of all your observations, time, readings,
measurements, and 
look out points MUST be carefully kept, it is a vital and
necessary book 
to keep in order to successfully be a survivor.

FIRE AND SHELTER:  

3 ELEMENTS ARE ABSOLUTELY VITALS FOR SURVIVAL:

FIRST SHELTER THEN WATER THEN FOOD.

Once can easily go without water for a few days or food for a
week or more but the cold, the rain, snow or wind can get you
down and out in one night.

In critical situation you MUST then either find or construct a
shelter and make fire then you will worry about finding water
then food.

Look for natural shelters which at night will form a shield
against prevailing winds.

The ideal being: a shallow cavity in a rocky slope facing South
thus retaining longer the sun's heat.

Build your fire in front of the rock but not too close since you
will instal yourself between the fire and the rock in order to
collect the thermal effect produce by the fire and its reflection
on the rock.

In other places use the shrubs or tall trees near by to shelter
you or build a shelter with what you see around you and MAKE SURE
that you have your shelter shut on 3 sides and open to the fire.

IMAGINATION IS ONE OF YOUR BEST WEAPON TO IMPROVISE & SURVIVE.
Once you have secure yourself a shelter and fire and maybe have
found water; think of signalization then food.

CABIN FEVER:

When it is storming out what do you do after you've slept
yourself silly? You talk for a while, a long time even, but then
sooner or later, cabin fever sets in.

That strange psychological malady of confined quarters that has
turned genteel trappers into murderers, peaceful loving couples
into fighting minks.

It turns solitary campers into strangers to themselves, who
convinced they're on a tropical island, shed their clothes in the
snow and decide to go for a stroll on the beach.

So, for lengthy winter camping or if there's any chance you'll be
weathered in bring a chess or checker set, some cards and a thick
book or two like the bible and a book on plants etc.

MILARD CENTRE FOLD:*

 Other uses of this book; the international orange cover makes a
highly signalling device.

The Milard centre fold*** can also be used for signalling and as
an emergency close-up mirror. Placed behind a candle or a small
fire, the mylard will intensify the lite.

The cover is wax-impregnated to serve as a fire starter and half
of that book is only good for good tinder! *** 

BURN 1/2 this BOOK  AS TINDER !**

PREPARING FOR OUTDOOR ADVENTURE:

You MUST ALWAYS carry a survival kit appropriate to the occasion
this means this book as well. For the kit see Survival Kit".* 

A)   That before going afield you will inform a responsible
     person as to where you're going.

B)   When you will return?  Unless most extreme conditions this
book will give you the fundamentals facts for survival until help
reaches you.

If you fail to return or report in  within a reasonable time,
help will be on the way within 24 hours.

In the majority of cases, lost or injured persons are found
within 72 hrs.

You can survive for 3 or 4 days, in fact much longer, even under
very adverse conditions.

NOTE:

3 or 4 days without food or water is not deadly although veryyy
booooring. Before your next outdoor trip do the following:

1)   PLAN:

Know where you are going and the time and distance and terrain
involved. Allow ample time for unhurried trip.

Know what ESSENTIAL equipment is required. Plan for adequate
food, water and clothing.

Plan for anticipated needs. Know what weather is expected and
prepare for the worst.

Choose companions of comparable mental attitude, physical
condition and ability.

ALWAYS let a responsible person know where you are going and when
you will return.

2)   BE ALERT:

Know the potential danger of such trip. Turn back when adverse
weather conditions set in or when you can't handle the terrain.

Evaluate all potential dangers. Watch for signs of physical and
mental problems in yourself or others.

React to danger warning signals immediately, not later. Be
observant.

3)   BE PREPARED:

Physically and mentally for your trip.  For changes of weather.
For emergency situations.

Carry extra food and clothes. Carry a survival kit including this
book. Know your first aid and carry a kit.

4)   CARRY THIS BOOK ON YOU AT ALL TIMES.

SELF-RELIANCE IS SURVIVAL!

LOST!:

STOP IMMEDIATELY! SIT DOWN! 

FORCE yourself to breathe Deeply, (Deep 6) Slowly. Conserve and
save your physical and mental resources you have.

Lean back against a tree a boulder and relax. Keep warm and dry
and insulate yourself from ground. Be assured that in these first
few minutes; 

YOU NOW HAVE INCREASED YOUR SURVIVAL CHANCES by OVER 50%

THINK??? If you know you can follow your back trail you are not
lost. But if in doubt stay put, at least for the time being.

Carefully read all the sections of this book which apply to your
situation. Do as much of the following as possible BEFORE DARK.

SURVIVAL STRATEGY STUDY!:

Good planning and preparation enable the survivor to confront
difficulties and dangers that pose a serious threat to survival.
They become contingencies for which you are equipped.

But you can not anticipate everything. You MUST be ready to
respond rapidly to the unexpected danger and to deal with
potential disaster rationally & realistically.  

You must overcome the tendency to panic with such conditions so
easily engender and take the action appropriate to the situation.

Sometimes a collision or other accident occurs with no warning of
any kind, but in most instances there is a moment of realisation
that something is going to happen and it is at that moment that
instinctive reaction can save lives even yours.

In many situations there is a considerable time in which an
awareness of potential disaster can develop and that is when the
panic reaction is probably most dangerous.

As mist closes in on a hill side reducing visibility to almost
nothing and making it easy to lose any sense of direction, most
people would begin to panic at the thought that they are going to
be trapped.

They begin to do foolish things and increase their
dangers;whereas they should already be assessing the
possibilities and looking for some suitable shelter in which to
wait until conditions become safe to continue.

Keeping calm, in the knowledge that you have the ability to
handle the situation will not only enable you to see it through
but also to see other solutions that may present themselves.

Some situations are predictable and knowledge of the techniques
for handling them will minimize the risks.

Learn them, they may save your life.. They make take considerable
nerve-like waiting for the right moment to escape from a car that
is sinking under water-but they are based on experience and sound
principles.

The answer to most general survival problems, however will often
lie in inspired improvisation drawing on those skills appropriate
to the situation.

Disaster may involve you in a contained situation which you MUST
handle alone or you may find yourself one of hundreds of people
in a large scale disaster over which there can be no control at
all. 

There is an enormous difference between coping with motoring
accidents and dealing with an air disaster.

As these extremes will show whatever the scale the same
resourcefulness and ability to call on a variety of knowledge and
skill will apply.

BOTH ARE MATTERS OF LIFE and DEATH, however many people involved.
REMEMBER THAT FAITH! CAN MOVE MOUNTAINS ! PRAYERS TOO !

SAS ESSENTIAL FOR SURVIVAL PSYCHOLOGY:

The following pages are from a book written by John Wiseman who
is a teacher and specialist in survival in the SAS British army.
He was for 26 years a professional soldier and became SAS
survival instructor.

The following methods were field tested so they are sure to help
you as it help others.

Since survival problems are the same for both soldier and
civilian it is good to listen to their knowledge.

The only difference is that the soldier has one more worry which
is that he MUST hide himself whereas the civilian will want to
attract attention to effect his rescue 

Everyone wants to be a survivor but the fitter you are and the
more knowledge you have the greater your chances will be.

Accidents often create survival situations so you MUST be
prepared to deal with crashes, collisions and natural disasters.

You MUST know how to deal with injuries, how to keep fit and
healthy and how to help others less fortunate than yourself.
Water, food, fire and shelter are basic needs. You MUST know how
to obtain them.

Laying out signals will attract a search and lead to rescue, but
if not found, you MUST be able to navigate to safety and know how
to negotiate rivers and mountain ranges.

You could be isolated anywhere in the world, from the Arctic ice
to a desert etc. Each environment calls for special survival
techniques.

Mountains, jungles, open plains and swamps can also seem
hazardous to the survivor, but each offers some form of support &
can be exploited for food,fuel, water and shelter if you know
how. The effect of climate is also very important.

You MUST know how to cope with intense cold and how to survive in
searing heat. They challenge the survivor in different ways.

Survival depends upon applying basic principles and adapting them
to the circumstances.

Of course the reader MUST use his own judgement in the
application of the methods shown in this book.

The tests for plant foods for instances are the only sure way of
being certain whether a particular fruit or leaf is safe or
poisonous for you.

The average person is unlikely to come to any harm if they follow
the method carefully but there is risk involved since individual
response to poison varies.

Even small quantities of toxic substances can be very dangerous
to some people.  

Some of the traps described are deadly and should NEVER be left
unsupervised where other people may come to harm and they could
inflict self-injury if handled carelessly.

REMEMBER once more that these methods have helped saved many SAS
lives and others and they will help you to be a survivor too.

REMEMBER also that:

ALMOST EVERYWHERE NATURE PROVIDES THE NECESSITIES FOR SURVIVAL.

AND ALSO EVEN MORE IMPORTANT IS THE WILL TO SURVIVE.

EQUALLY IMPORTANT:

Is a personal preparedness, so that you are both physically and
psychologically equipped to deal with the stresses and hazards of
survival conditions.
 
You MUST have a clear understanding of survival needs, especially
of the need for and ways of obtaining water and salt.

The human species has established itself in almost every corner
of the Earth and:

ALMOST EVERYWHERE NATURE PROVIDES THE NESSESITIES FOR HIS
SURVIVAL.

      (I know I repeat but its vital!)

In some places the provision is abundant, in others very meagre
and it takes common sense, knowledge and ingenuity to take
advantage of the resources available.

Even more important is the will to survive. No will = no way out
and REMEMBER that with God all things are possible.

Men and women have shown that they can survive in the most
adverse situations, but they have done so because of their
determinations to do so.

Without that the knowledge and skills in this book will be of
little use if you find yourself in trouble.

Survival is the art of staying alive. Any equipment you have MUST
be considered a bonus. You MUST know how to take everything
possible from nature and use it to the full.

How to attract attention to yourself so that the rescuers may
find you? How to make your way to civilization, if hope of rescue
is not on the cards, even navigation without map or compass etc.

You MUST know how to maintain a healthy physical and mental
condition, or if sick or wounded, how to heal yourself and
others.

You MUST be able to maintain your morale and that of others who
share your situation, this is where prayers becomes extremely
useful specially for those who haven't done so for a long time.

Lack of equipment should not mean that you are unequipped for you
will carry skills and experience with you but those skills as a
knife MUST not be allowed to get rusty and you MUST extend your
knowledge all the time.

Anyone, young or old from whatever kind of life can find him or
herself in a survival situation.

Survival skills are not only concerned with the extremes of the
air crashes on a mountain peak or a shipwreck in the tropics or a
vehicle breakdown in the middle of nowhere or desert.

Every time you fasten your seat belt in a car you are giving
yourself a greater chance of survival.

Checking each way before crossing a road or ensuring that an open
fire is safe before going to bed are survival technique as well.
Safe habits that you MUST develop as much as acquiring skills.

BE PREPARED:

The Boy Scouts' motto is the right one. Anyone setting out on a
journey or planning an expedition should follow it by discovering
as much as possible about the situations likely to be faced and
the skills & equipment called for.

IT IS THE MOST BASIC COMMON SENSE TO PREPARE YOURSELF.

To take appropriate gear and to plan as carefully as possible.

Your kit could make the difference between failure and success,
even life and death. Especially when back-packing.

Many people and me included take too much along, & have to learn
from bitter experience what they really need and what we could
have done without. (VCR?)

Getting the right balance is not easy. This is why we try to help
you by giving these information.

FACING DISASTER: 

When facing a disaster it is easy to let yourself go, to collapse
and be consumed in self-pity. But it is no use giving up or
burying your head in the sand and hoping that this a bad dream
that will soon pass.

It won't, and with that kind of attitude it will rapidly become
much worse. Only positive action can save you!

A healthy, well nourished person can physically tolerate a great
deal, provided that he or she has self-confidence.

Even if sick or injured, a determined person can win through and
recover from seemingly impossible situations. To do so there are
many stresses that MUST be overcome.

SURVIVAL STRESSES:

The survival situation will put you under pressure both
physically and mentally even morally. You will have to overcome
some or all the following stresses. (Ratssss!) 

Fear and anxiety. Pain, illness and injury. Cold and or heat.
Thirst, hunger and fatigue

Sleep deprivation. Boredom,loneliness, isolation. Lack of
teddy-bear as well. Can you cope? You have to! (See how nice we
are!)

SELF-CONFIDENCE IS A PRODUCT OF GOOD TRAINING & SOUND KNOWLEDGE:

THESE MUST BE ACQUIRED BEFORE YOU HAVE TO FACE UP TO A SURVIVAL
CONDITION.

The fact that you are reading this book is an indication that you
have the seeds of the determination to equip yourself and that is
the real starting-point.

Confidence will enable you to overcome fear, boredom, isolation
and loneliness. Physical fitness plays an important part. The
fitter you are the better you will survive. 

Initially you may have to go without sleep to ensure that you are
in a safe location, or make a long march in dangerous condition.

Do not wait until you are forced to go without sleep to see
whether you are capable of doing so.

Prove it to yourself now by getting into training. Develop the
resources to cope with fatigue and loss of sleep.

You will be working hard to procure food and water. They will
relive hunger and thirst.

But finding them will tire you and you will need adequate shelter
to enable you to rest and recover from your efforts.

DON'T OVERDO IT. REST FREQUENTLY AND ASSESS THE SITUATION.
Pain and fever are warning signals that call attention to an
injury or physical condition.

They are not in themselves dangerous, however distressing and
discomforting. Pain can be controlled and overcome.

Its biological function is to protect and injured part to prevent
you using it, but this warning may have to be ignored to avoid
the risk of further injury or death.

Injured people with multiple fractures, who would certainly have
died if they had just lain where they were, hoping for help, have
been know to crawl long distances (12 miles in one case) from
isolated regions to reach assistance.

Concentration and intense effort can actually stop and reduce
feelings of pain for a time, though it is important to treat any
injury as soon as possible.

REMEMBER that ignoring even a small sore or blister could lead to
serious problems later, especially in the Tropics.

PSYCHO SURVIVAL # 4 :

This survival psycho file is taken from an exert of R.Digest
called Survival at Hoa Lo. It may help some of us in the future.

TAPPING CODE; NUMBER ROW THEN COLUMN  Roll Call:

New man can you hear? It was Reiner! " I hear you Colonel. Its
me, Lieutenant Coffee." "Welcome to Heartbreak Hotel, Jerry.

Try not to talk so loud. Communication is forbidden. The man in
cell one is watching under his door for the guard's shadow. If
you hear a single cough or thump on the wall, stop talking
immediately."

Talking is very dangerous. You MUST learn to communicate by
tapping on the walls. Its called TAP CODE.

The code is the only link we have. Look for a square of letters
comprising the alphabet, except we use C for K and numeral
running along the top and one side. To get the letter you want
simply tap! 

THE NUMBER OF THE ROW, THEN THE NUMBER OF THE COLUMN.

        1  2  3   4   5 
     1  A  B  C   D   E
     2  F  G  H   I   J
     3  L  M  N   O   P
     4  Q  R  S   T   U
     5  V  W  X   Y   Z

THE UNEXPECTED:

"A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an
invasion, butcher a hog, conn a ship, design a building, write a
sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set a bone, comfort the
dying.

Take orders, give orders, cooperate, act alone, solve equations,
analyse a new problem, pitch manure, program a computer, cook a
tasty meal, fight efficiently  die gallantly.  Specialization is
for insects. Robert Heinlein"

SOME LOOSE THEIR LIFE BY SHEER PRIDE! TOO COWARD TO BE AFRAID &
BACK OFF OR FIND OTHER WAYS AROUND THE PROBLEM. 

HOW CAN YOU PREPARE FOR THE UNEXPECTED & AVOID OSTRICH!:

Preparing for expected difficulties an dangers is difficult
enough, but what chance have you of equipping yourself for the
totally unknown disaster? 

Yet these are the disaster that immediately spring to people's
minds. The shipwreck & the plane crash or forced landing in
unfamiliar & difficult terrain or  in a war starting while
visiting a country. Ooopss!

This is the reason for this book's existence!

There are specialised books on mountaining, sailing or pot-holing
in the desert and the jungle and the polar wastes and reading
them will be part of the preparatory research before taking up
these activities or travelling in these areas.

Even more important, however is to know about a whole range of
skills which can be applied and adapted to all kinds of
situations and to develop a way of thinking that enables you to
draw upon them to find the solutions to particular problems. This
is the preparation U can make for the unexpected. But its not
all.

You can equip yourself with a few small items which will increase
your chances many times over by helping you with some of the
basic necessities of survival. This can tip the balance between
failure and success.

They will fit in a small container slipped into a pocket of bag
and can be carried anywhere. They are your survival kit.

IF & WHEN THERE IS AN EMERGENCY YOU WILL BE GLAD YOU ALWAYS?
CARRY IT. (oooppsss!)

More bulky and therefore likely to be left at home, but still
compact enough to carry on a belt whenever you are travelling,
are a knife and the items which will fit in your survival pouch.*

Without the basics these 2 kits provide, you can still improvise
but they will give you a head start.

DON'T FORGET THIS BOOK.

COPING WITH NEW SITUATION:

Wether in a Survival situation or in any other met at some time
by everyone, either world problems or personal which crowed in
upon us and suddenly we feel we can not cope?

A GOOD ADVICE IS THIS ONE:

Don't try to find the answer to everything at once; go step by
step, and remember that life by the yard is hard and by the inch
it's a cinch.

note via  s/b  there is a new development via cellular telephone 
now with modem capability and soon to come with gonio ability to
check latest develop.. when ready to go to press****

WARNING:

The survival techniques described in this book are for use in
dire circumstances where the safety of individuals is at risk.

Accordingly the publisher cannot accept any responsibility for
any prosecutions or proceeding brought or instituted against any
person or body as a result of the use or misuse of any techniques
described or any loss, injury or damaged caused thereby.

In practising and perfecting these survival techniques the rights
of landowners and all relevant laws protecting certain species of
animals and plants and controlling the use of firearms and other
weapons must be regarded as paramount.

M. ASHER ESCAPE BELT: FROM  ENGLISH  SAS TECHICS. 

ESSENTIAL PART OF THE SAS TRAINING ALWAYS WORE THEM ON YOU & WITH
THIS BOOK . OOOPSSS!

It contains enough food and equipment to sustain you if you ever
have to abandon your Bergen bag it consist of: 

SUGAR, TEA, RATIONS SUCH AS OXO CUBES, CHOCOLATE AND SOUP, BLOCK
OF HEXAMINE* FOR FUEL, FISHING LINE!

(best all around = 300 feet, 150lbs) + 12 HOOKS (best all around
is Mackerel #14 & #10, SNARES, A SMALL KNIFE,

SPOON, WATERPROOF MATCHES, A MUG,TORCH / CANDLE, A BUTTON COMPASS
AND A SMALL SCALE MAP OF THE AREA & 1 SPACE BLANKET!

IT MUST BE SMALL, COMPACT, capable of being carried in a belt and
provide sustenance for 2 days after that your combat survival
skills come in or you are dead zero Zorro! ***add on: ****2 rpt 
in: in s-kit

The new band aid used for burns which has 2 uses 1 for burns and
one for cuts. this a new item to include in f/aid and s/kit******

3 MORE SURVIVAL KIT:   (CARSON?)

Here are 3 added kits from survival experts. May you never need
them but if so, here it is:

MOUNTAINEER'S 12 ESSENTIALS:

RECOMMENDED BY EXPERTS OF ALL TYPES:
1)   AT LEAST ONE COMPLETE CHANGE OF CLOTHING including extra for
such contingencies as rain & cold weather. A cheap  lite nylon
coat & pants to cut the wind is also A  MUST.

2)   EXTRA FOOD. Include extra rations in your minimum. This is
your insurance policy in case something goes really wrong.

3)   SUNGLASSES. Every time you set out for a strange area it's
good to have a pair along. If you are planning on desert, alpine
or winter camping, it's a rare occasion that you will not need
them. Even Eskimos worry about snow blindness.

4)   A KNIFE. A substantial pocketknife is the order of the day.
No need for bowie knife and the big sheath knife for those who
are out to tackle bears with bare hands. A good swiss army knife
is excellent or a Buck for bigger job.

5)   FIRE STARTERS, jelly, ribbon, tablets or impregnated peat
bricks. There are emergencies where a fire is both necessary and
difficult to start. Every kit should include a supply of starters
of one kind or another.

CANDLES ARE 1 OF THE BEST!

6)   EMERGENCY MATCHES. Fire starters alone don't a fire make.
You need matches. Long wooden ones are best and soaked in wax to
make them weather proof and keep them in a waterproof container.

"PERRON-ELLE"  NOTE: Fire start-her!

"BIC TYPE OF LIGHTHERS ARE A NEW ADDITION TO FIRE STARTERS IT IS
VERY GOOD TO HAVE 4 or 5  OF THEM ON YOU AND IN YOUR S/KITS. A
Zippo fluid lighter is also very good type!

7)   A FIRST AID KIT. See on how to build one. In f/aid kit (a
Kotex is a good to stop blood from any cut & to start fire too)

8)   A FLASHLIGHT. Everyone should carry his own and add extra
     batteries & bulbs just in case. 

DON'T FORGET BATTERIES!

9)   MAPS. You should have a map when going to all but the most
familiar places. It's not only a safety factor but can add a lot
of enjoyment to your trip, helping you to find the best spots and
sights.

10)  A GOOD QUALITY COMPASS even 2 might help in case the first
one goes berserk. (OOOPPPSSS!)

11)  A SPACE BLANKET. It did not exist in the first writing up of
this list.

TODAY IT IS AN INVALUABLE SAFETY PRECAUTION.

Weighing only 2 ounces it opens up to a full 56"X84". 

IT REFLECTS UP TO   90% OF A SLEEPER'S BODY HEAT! mM!

While at the same time keeping out rain, rain and snow. NEVER to
be used BUT FOR EMERGENCIES ONLY!

ESSENTIAL AS EMERGENCY GEAR FOR ALL KIND OF USES INCLUDING
SIGNALIZATION & FIRST AID QUICK WARM "MMM!) UP BLANKET.!

12)  THIS BOOK! THIS BOOK!

PERRONALLY I WOULD ADD: 12B:

1 Fishing line  best all around is 300ft/150lbs = fishing,
snaring, wick, string. 6 Fishhooks: (best is Mackerel #14 / and 6
#10) fishing, catching birds. Snare wire: 1oz. Setting snares &
other uses.

HUDSON BAY"S SURVIVAL KIT:

Drawing upon nearly 300 years of experience in the wild places
has prepared a watertight emergency kit particularly for use on
the trading concern's aircraft.

This 11 pounds outfit which is capable of floating measures 12 X
11 X 3 1/2" + 1 SURVIVAL BOOK! "ES-PERRON-LE! "

The content have been assembled with a view of maintaining:

1 INDIVIDUAL NORMALLY FOR 1 WEEK, IF THE USER CUT DOWN ON
EXERTION TO A MAXIMUM AND HARDSHIP TO A MINIMUM. THINK? A LOT B4
ACTING

REMEMBER!!!:

BREATHS  "6" DEEPLY BEFORE!!!
ANY HARD TASKS or STRESS TIME!

And with conservative characteristic estimates that the
sustenance can be stretched about 4 times as far. Here's what
they include dear Rambo, ZORRO & JANE!

ITEMS: QUANTITY PURPOSE:

28 Tea bags: Make tea / (Tea quenches not coffee, + good in f/aid
too) 50 Vitamin Pills: Make up diet deficiency Pilot Bread 30oz
food

Butter (margarine) 16oz food / Strawberry jam 14 1/2oz.:food/
Klik (spam etc) 12oz. food / Condensed milk  14oz. food
/Chocolate bars  10 of 5oz. food

Matches:(wood) 100 Light fire & 2 Bic lighter/ Swiss Knife: 1
multi purpose / 1 Spoon for : eating, fish bait, scoop, shovel, /
Whistle: signalling./1 Double face mirror  signalling.
(Heliograph)( Very very useful./

1 Fishing line  best all around is 300ft/150lbs = fishing,
snaring, wick, string. 6 Fishhooks: (best is Mackerel #14 / and 6
#10) fishing, catching birds. Snare wire: 1oz. Setting snares &
other uses. 1 Space Blanket.

2 Candles: cooking, light, etc Kleenex: 1 package multi purposes
Camphor: 1 small jar mosquito bites, cuts, chap lips.

Remember to use wooden matches and to have them waterproof by
dipping them in hot wax before going out in the bushes.

FIRE STARTERS:
"PERRON-ELLE"  NOTE:

"BIC TYPES OF LIGHTHERS ARE A NEW ADDITION TO FIRE STARTERS IT IS
CRUCIAL TO HAVE SEVERAL OF THEM ON YOU AND IN YOUR S/KITS AT ALL
TIME AND EVERYWHERE.

ARMY CANTEEN:  (Special container!)

If you don't have the Hudson Bay Kit then use an army kit canteen
which is rectangular and fits one into the other easily and easy
to make watertight as well & has collapsible handle.

AGAIN, AND AGAIN; BRING THIS SURVIVAL BOOK IN YOUR COAT POCKET AT
ALL TIME. (Ooopppsss?!?)

SURVIVAL SAS KIT:

A few items can make all the difference in the fight for
survival. Collect the things listed below.

They can all be fitted into a small container, such as a 2 oz
tobacco tin, that will hardly be noticeable when slipped into an
anorak pocket. 

MAKE A HABIT OF ALWAYS HAVING IT WITH YOU.

Do not choose something bigger. You may find it inconvenient to
carry and leave it out on the one occasion you actually need it.

Many people who roll their own cigarettes carry such a tin. But
this one is much more useful. It may save your life. The smoker
is speeding up the end of his.

Experience has proved that each items earns its place, though
some are more use in some situation that in others: fish hooks
for instance may be invaluable in the jungle but useless in a
desert.

Polish the inside of the lid to make a mirror like reflecting
surface and seal it, to be waterproof with a strip of adhesive
tape which can be easily removed and replaced. Don't just forget
the tin.  

Regularly check the contents, changing any which deteriorate such
as matches, medicine tablets.

Mark all drug containers with use and dosage and a run-out date
when they should be replaced. Pack spare space in the tin with
cotton wool which will keep the contents from rattling and can be
used for fire lighting.
     
FIRE IS VITAL TO SURVIVAL.
     4 items are for making it.

1)    MATCHES:

Waterproof matches are useful but bulkier than ordinary
non-safety, strike anywhere matches, which can be made
shower-proof by dipping the heads in melted candle fat. To save
space, snap off half of each match stick.

It is much easier to use matches than to make fire by other
methods but don't waste them, use only when improvised method
fail.

Take them one at a time from the tin and replace the lid. NEVER
leave the container open or lying on the ground.

2)   CANDLE:

Invaluable for starting a fire as well as a light source. Shave
square for packing. If made of tallow it is also fat to eat in an
emergency or to use for frying. Bring 2 at least!

But be sure it is tallow; paraffin wax and some other candles are
inedible. Yet  Tallow does not store well, especially in hot
climates.

3)   FLINT:  (Fred?)

Flint will work when wet and they will go on striking along after
you run out of matches.

Invest a processed flint with a saw striker. Recently on the
market you can buy a magnesium flint fire starter which is great
on all occasion.*** see Koets stuff**

4)   MAGNIFYING GLASS:

Can start a fire from direct sunshine and be useful for searching
for splinter and stings and to replace lost reading glasses. One
of the advantage of the top of the line swiss knife is that it
has a magnifying glass incorporated within.

5)   NEEDLES AND THREAD:

Several needles, including at least one with a very large eye
that can be threaded with sinew and coarse threads. Choose strong
thread and wrap it around the needles.

6)   FISH/BIRDS HOOKS AND LINE:

A selection of different hooks in a small tin or packet. Add a
few split lead weight.

The best all around line for all kind of fish /birds is 150lbs
test nylon 300 feet and the best all hook is the mackerel #14 and
its smaller one #10, take 6 of each at least.

Remember that a small hook will catch both and large fish but a
large hook will only catch  big ones. Include as much line as
possible, it will also be useful for catching birds.

7)   COMPASS:

A luminous button compass. But MAKE SURE you know how to read it
as some compass can be confusing and remember NEVER MAKE A
READING CLOSE TO ANY METALLIC SURFACE.

A liquid type is the best but also MAKE SURE that it does not
leak, has no bubble in it & is fully serviceable. The pointer is
prone to rust. MAKE SURE it is on a pivot and swings freely.

8)   BETA LIGHT:*

A light-emitting crystal, only the size of a small coin but ideal
for reading a mag at night and useful fishing lure -expensive but
just about everlasting and well worth to buy.

9)   SNARE WIRE:

Preferably brass-wire 60-90cm (2-3ft) should do. Save for snares,
but could solve many survival problems.

10)  FLEXIBLE SAW:

These usually come with large rings at the ends as handles. These
take up too much room, so remove them, they can be replace by
wooden toggle when you need to use it.

To protect from rust and breakage cover it in a film of grease.
Flexible saws can be used to cut even quite large trees, but be
slow when cutting. (Where's the rush John?)

11)  MEDICAL KIT:

What you include depends upon your own skill in using it. Pack
medicines in airtight containers with cotton wool to prevent
rattling. The following items will cover most ailments but they
are only a guide.

ANALGESIC:     A pain reliever for mild and moderate pain.
Codeine phosphate is ideal for tooth-ear and headaches.

DOSE =    One tablet every 6 hours as needed but they can cause
constipation as side effect so will help in case of loose bowels.
Not to be taken by children, asthmatics or people with liver
disorders.

INTESTINAL SEDATIVE:

For treating acute and chronic diarrhoea. Immodium is usually
favoured. DOSE= 2 tablets initially, then one each time a loose
stool is passed. (Shiiittt!)

ANTIBIOTIC:

For general infections. Tetracycline can be used even by people
hypersensitive to penicillin. DOSE= One 250mg tablet 4 times
daily, repeated 5 to 7 days.  Carry enough for a full course.
 
If taking them avoid milk, calcium and iron preparations or other
drugs containing aluminum hydroxide.

ANTIESTAMINE:

For allergies, insect bites and stings and may also help in case
of bad reaction to a drug.

Piriton is recommended in Britain and Benadryl in USA. Sleepiness
is a side-effect of Piriton, so useful as mild sleeping pill. Do
not exceed recommended dosages or take with alcohol.

WATER STERILISING TABLETS:

WARNING:

(REMEMBER JUST 1 DROP, OR JUST MOISTENING YOUR LIPS ON BAD WATER
CAN MAKE YOU ULTRA SICK EVEN KILL YOU!)

For use where water is suspect and you can not boil. Follow
manufacturer's instructions. Water near any city is dangerous and
in most cities in South America as well.

ANTI-MALARIA TABLETS:

Essential in areas where Malaria is present. There are types
which require only one tablet taken monthly.

POTASSIUM PERMANGANATE:

Has several uses. Add to water and mix until water becomes bright
pink to sterilise it, deeper pink to make an antiseptic and to a
full red to treat fungal diseases such as athlete's foot.

12)  SURGICAL BLADES:

At least 2 scalpel blades of different sizes. A handle can be
made from wood when required.

13)  BUTTERFLY SUTURES:

Use to hold the hedges of wounds together.

14)  PLASTERS: (band-aids)*

Assorted sizes, preferably waterproof for minor abrasions and
keeping cuts clean. They can be cut and be used as butterfly
sutures. ** 

Use the new burn type 90% MADE OF WATER.  It doubles up in its
uses for burns and cuts.***

15)  CONDOM:

Beside fun this can make a good water bag (1 litre).

16)  1 TAMPAX: ???

Beside its feminine use, it can be used to start a fire and as
well as blood cloth when you cut deeply. (Ouch!)

17:  PLATE SURVIVAL KNIFE:
     WONDER KNIFE! pix need**

Hard to find but well worth it, this new survival knife is the
size of your plastic money card, but made of high grade steel.

IT HAS 12 FUNCTIONS: wood saw blade, screw driver, normal blade,
ruler, bottle opener, file, can opener, heliograph from its
mirror polished side etc. Only $10.00  The trick is to find it,
there is a cheap imitation around but its size is much wider and
bulkier.

The one I mention is the exact size of your plastic card and fits
well into a wallet. This knife should be in your wallet even a
spare one into your kit. 

AFTER MUCH RESEARCHES I HAVE NEVER FOUND A KNIFE WITH SO MANY
USES but for the big Swiss knife! DO YOUR VERY BEST TO FIND IT!

Special note here on the new multi purpose army shovel, plux pix
need, as an all around big tool and weapon sword type to boot***

LIGHTER FLUID: (SPECIAL NOTE!)

A small can of it can BE EXTREMELY USEFUL TO QUICK FIRE START AND
WARM UP AND MUST BE BROUGHT ALONG WHENEVER POSSIBLE!

This is one of the RAMBO T"RICKS" used by modern soldiers to
light fire. IT SHOULD BE KEPT ALWAYS ON YOU, in a side pocket for
emergency warm up & uses.

FAT IS THE MOST IMPORTANT FOOD:
For survival in the cold weather.

Remember that fat in calories is the most concentrated food yet
the sustenance the most difficult to find while living off the
land.

If you can not get it from animals revert to insects, such as
larva, grubs, and what you may dig or find by burning a small
grass area.

Bear live on grubs yet they are fat enough Think insects if no
games. After all St. John lived on locust and honey for many
years to prove the point. Insects are very fat in protein

FOOD:   (Special add notes)

ALL HEALTHY MAMMALS, BIRDS, INSECTS = EDIBLE! 

ALL GRASSES, SEEDS, NUTS, FRUITS = EDIBLE

REMEMBER:

STEW GIVE THE MOST FOOD VALUE ALL EDIBLE SALT & FRESH WATER
FISHES HAVE SAFE WATER IN MEAT. Just chew or wring it.

MARINE LIFE:

ALL SEAWEED (not threadlike) below water ARE EDIBLE, cooked; eat
slowly.

ARCTIC: Nearly ALL VEGETABLE = EDIBLE. ALL LICHEN IN FAR NORTH
ARE EDIBLE, STEAM OR BOIL THEM FOR SAFETY.

NO KNOWN GRASS IS POISONOUS.

PLANT EDIBILITY TEST =:

Limit diet to plants positively identifiable  or seen eaten by
rabbit, rodents, beavers, squirrels, raccoons, monkeys and bears.

Birds are not reliable. Place very small amount inside lower lip,
taste for soapy, bitter, acid, burning taste for 5 minutes.

Increase dose every 6-10 hours. If no ill effect in 24 hours it
is probably safe, but continue caution.

AVOID:

Those with MILKY SAP, (toxic) or of red colour, black spurs on
grain (diseased) or that look sickly. Cook if in doubt.

4 LAST NOTES ABOUT COLD:

PREVENT COLD BY COVERING YOUR HEAD WHICH LOOSES 1/3 OF YOUR BODY
HEAT. COVER ALSO YOUR NOSE WHICH LOOSES 50% OF YOUR HEAT AT THE
LEVEL OF THE HEAD OF COURSE.

PREVENT COLD FEET BY PUTTING HAY OR NEWSPAPER AS SOLE. DAMPNESS
IS WHAT CAUSES COLD. 

IF YOUR FEET ARE WARM THE REST OF THE BODY IS ALSO WARM. MAKE
SURE YOUR SHOES ARE NOT TO TIGHT AND THAT THE NEWSPAPER SHEET IS
FOLDED 4 TIMES, 1/2 A SHEET SHOULD DO IT.

CUT THE EXCESS FROM THE HEEL, & CHANGE OR REPLACE  EVERY NIGHT
(or as often as needed).

YOU COULD EVEN USE IT AS A FIRE STARTER IN EMERGENCY.

BACKPACK SURVIVAL: FROM: DUNCAN LONG 

There's a lot of confusion about what survival means. To some,
it's setting through the aftermath of an airplane wreck in a
desolate area. It can mean knowing when to avoid walking in
radioactive wastes. 

Or, it can mean knowing how to barter with troops in the
aftermath of riots, war, and looting. To others, survival has to
do with avoiding danger and knowing how to deal with it when it
breaks into your home in the dead of night.

Survival ideas abound and there are as many definitions and
strategies as there are survivalists. Some have good ideas for
survival and some have unsound tactics. 

Bad ideas can mean extra work or trouble in everyday life; bad
ideas during a survival situation get you killed. On-the-job
training doesn't work when you're dealing with poison and
gunfights, or survival.

ONE OF THE MOST DANGEROUS IDEAS--AS FAR AS I AM CONCERNED--IS
THAT OF "BACKPACK SURVIVAL."  

A "back-pack survivalist" is a survivalist that plans on leaving
his home ahead of a disaster and taking to the woods with only
what he can carry out with him.

He plans to survive through a strategy that is a sort of cross
between the Boy-Scout-in-the-woods and Robinson Crusoe.

The backpack survivalist plans on outrunning danger with a
four-wheel drive or a motorcycle and hopes to travel light with a
survival kit of everything he might need to cope with the
unexpected. 

He hasn't cached anything in the area he's headed for because,
chances are, he doesn't know where he's headed. 

Somehow, he hopes to overcome all odds with a minimum of supplies
and a maximum of smarts. Certainly it is a noble cause; but it
seems like one destined to failure. And that's not survival.

(Let's back up a minute. Backpack fever--or bug-outosis--does
make sense when you're facing a localized disaster like a
derailed train with overturned poisonous gas cars. A potential
nuclear meltdown, an impending hurricane, or similar disasters
where there is a safe place to run to.

During such a time, it makes perfect sense to retreat and come
back when things settle down. 

Likewise, some people have to work in dangerous areas. For them,
donning a backpack and heading for a retreat that they've
prepared before hand is a viable survival strategy. These people
aren't backpack survivalists.)

Let me make a confession. Yes, I once was a closet backpack
survivalist.  I had an ALICE pack and had it packed with all I
could carry. As I learned more about how to survive, I realized I
needed to carry more. 

Soon I discovered that, just for my family to survive for a very
few days, I would need a pack mule and/or a hernia operation...
Something as very wrong.

Probably most survivalists start out the same way. Things are
bad, so let's bug out. Backpack survivalism is an effort to deal
with the possibility of a major disaster. 

As backpack survivalists, we make elaborate plans centered around
the idea of "bugging out" of the area we live in. 

We hope to travel to an area that is safer than the one we're in
and plan on living off the land or on some survival supplies we
have hidden in the area. 

On the home front, we carefully prepare a stock of supplies that
we can quickly cart off in a car or van when things start to look
bad.

As more and more plans are made and as ever more survival gear is
purchased, the survivalist realizes just how much he needs to
cope with in order to survive. 

If he is any sort of realist, he soon amasses enough gears to
warrant a truck or--more likely--a moving van just for carrying
the survival equipment. (Don't laugh, there are survivalists who
have large trucks for just such use.)

Some brave souls continue to make more elaborate plans and some
of these survivalists may be able to pull off their plans. 

Those who have really thought things out and have spared no
expenses may manage to survive with a bug-out strategy. 

But I think there are more logical--and less expensive--ways to
survive a large crisis.

Forget all your preconceived notions for a minute.  

Imagine that there is a national emergency and you are an outside
observer? What happens if a nuclear attack is eminent, an
economic collapse has occurred, or a dictator has taken over and
is ready to round up all malcontents (with survivalists at the
top of the list)?

Situations change with time. The survivalist movement--and
backpack fever--first started up when gas guzzler cars were about
all that anyone drove. 

That meant that a survivalist with some spare gasoline could
outdistance his unprepared peers and get to a retreat that was
far from the maddening crowd, as it were.

(Read some of Mel Tappan's early writing on survival retreats.
His ideas are good but many have been undone with the new,
fuel-efficient cars.)

With cars getting 30 or even 40 miles per gallon, it isn't rare
for a car to be able to travel half way across a state on less
than a tank of gasoline. 

The exodus from cities or trouble spots will be more limited by
traffic snarls than lack of gasoline even if the gas stations are
completely devoid of their liquid fuel.  

Too, there are a lot of people thinking about what to do if the
time for fleeing comes. A lot of people will be headed for the
same spots. (Don't laugh that off, either.

In my area, every eighth person has confided his secret retreat
spot to me. And about half of them are all headed for the same
spot: an old missile silo devoid of water and food. I suspect
that the battle at the gates of the old missile base will rival
the Little Big Horn.)

No matter how out-of-the-way their destination, most survivalists
are kidding themselves if they think others will not be headed
for their hideaway spot along with them. There are few places in
the US which aren't accessible to anyone with a little driving
skill and a good map.

Too, there are few places which aren't in grave danger during a
nuclear war or national social unrest.

Though most nuclear war survival books can give you a nice little
map showing likely targets, they don't tell you some essential
information. Like what the purpose of the attack will be.

The enemy may not be aiming for military targets that day; a
blackmail threat might begin by hitting the heart of the farmland
or a number of cities before demanding the surrender of the
country being attacked. The target areas on the maps might be
quite safe.

And the maps show where the missiles land IF they all enjoy 100 %
accuracy and reliability. Anyone knows of such conditions in war?

With Soviet machinery? Targets may be relatively safe places to
be in.

Added to this is the fact that some areas can be heavily
contaminated or completely free of contamination depending on the
wind directions in the upper atmosphere. Crystal ball in your
survival gear?

But let's ignore all the facts thus far for a few moments and
assume that a backpack survivalist has found an ideal retreat and
is planning to go there in the event of a national disaster...
What next?

His first concern should be that he will have a hard time taking
the supplies he needs with him.  A nuclear war might mean that it
will be impossible to grow food for at least a year and foraging
is out as well since animals and plants may be contaminated
extensively.

An economical collapse wouldn't be much better.  It might
discourage the raising of crops; no money, no sales except for
the barter to keep a small farm family going. 

With large corporations doing much of our farming these days, it
is not unreasonable to expect a major famine coming on the heals
of  an economic collapse. Raising food would be a good way to
attract starving looters from miles around.

Ever try to pack a year's supply of food for a family into a
small van or car? There is not much room left over. But the
backpack survivalist needs more than just food.

If he lives in a cold climate (or thinks there might be something
to the nuclear winter theory) then he will need some heavy
clothing. 
 
Rifles, medicine, ammunition, tools, and other supplies will also
increase what he'll need to be taking or which he will have to
hide away at his retreat site.

Shelter? Building a place to live (in any style other than early
American caveman) takes time.

If he builds a cabin beforehand, he may find it vandalized or
occupied when he gets to his retreat; if he doesn't build it
beforehand, he may have to live in his vehicle or a primitive
shelter of some sort.

Thus, a major problem is to get a large enough vehicle to carry
every thing he needs as well as to live in.

History has shown that cities empty themselves without official
evacuation orders when things look bad. It happened in WW II and
has even  happened in the US during approaching hurricanes, large
urban fires, & nuclear reactor problems.

So there is a major problem of timing which the backpack
survivalist must contend with. He has to be packed and ready to
go with all members of his family at the precise moment he learns
of the disaster!

The warning he gets that warrants evacuating an area will have to
be acted on quickly if he is to get out ahead of the major
traffic snarls that will quickly develop.

A spouse at work or shopping or kids across town at school means
he will either have to leave them behind or be trapped in the
area he is in. A choice not worth having to make.

Unless he is gotten a hot-line from the White House, the backpack
survivalist will not hear the bad news much ahead of everyone
else.

If he doesn't act immediately, he will be trapped out on the road
and get a first-hand idea of  what grid-lock is like if he is in
an urban area.

Even out on the open road, far away from a city, an interstate
can become hectic following a ballgame... 

Imagine what it would be like if everyone were driving for their
lives, some cars were running out of fuel (& the occupants trying
to stop someone for a ride), and the traffic laws were being
totally ignored while the highway  patrol tried to escape along
with everyone else. Just trying to get off or on major highways
might become impossible.

If things bog down, how long can the backpack survivalist keep
those around from helping to unload his truck-load of supplies
that they will be in bad need of?  
  
Telling them they should have prepared ahead of time will not get
many sympathetic words.

Even on lightly traveled roadways, how safe would it be to drive
around in a vehicle loaded with supplies?  Our backpack
survivalist will need to defend himself.

But let's suppose that he's thought all this out.  He has a large
van, had the supplies loaded in it, managed to round every member
of his family up beforehand, somehow got out of his area ahead of
the mob, is armed to the teeth, and doesn't need to take an
interstate route.

When he reaches his destination, his troubles are far from over.
The gridlock and traffic snarls will not stop everyone. People
will slowly be coming out of heavily populated areas and most of
them will have few supplies.

They will have weapons (guns are one of the first things people
grab in a crisis according to civil defense studies) and the
evacuees will be desperate. How many pitched battles will the
survivalist's family be able to endure? 

How much work--or even sleep--can he get when he is constantly on
the lookout to repel those who may be trying to get a share of
his supplies?

This assumes that he gets to where he is going ahead of everyone
else. He might not though. If he has to travel for long, he may
discover squatters on his land or find that some local person has
staked out his retreat area for their own. 

There won't be any law to help out; what happens next? Since
(according to military strategists) our backpack survivalist
needs about three times as many people to take an area as to
defend it, he will need to have some numbers with him and expect
to suffer some casualties. Does that sound like a good way to
survive?

What about the local people that don't try to take over his
retreat before he gets there? Will they be glad to see another
stranger move into the area to tax their limited supplies? Or
will they be setting up roadblocks to turn people like the
backpack survivalist away?  

But let's just imagine that somehow he has discovered a place
that does not have a local population and where those fleeing
cities are not able to get to. 

What happens when he gets to his retreat? How good does he need
to be at hunting and fishing? 

One reason mankind went into farming was that hunting and fishing
don't supply enough food for a very large population nor do they
work during times of drought or climatic disruption. What does he
do when he runs out of ammunition or game?

What happens if the streams become so contaminated that he cannot
safely eat what he catches? Can he stake out a large enough area
to guarantee that he won't deplete it of game so that the next
year is not barren of animals?

Farming? Unless he finds some unclaimed farm machinery and a
handy storage tank of gasoline at his retreat, he will hardly get
off first base.
 
Even primitive crop production requires a plow and work animals
(or a lot of manpower) to pull the blade. No plow, no food for
him or domestic animals.

And domestic animals don't grow on trees. Again, unless he just
happens to find some cows waiting for him at his retreat, he'll
be out of luck. (No one has packaged freeze-dried cows or
chickens--at least, not in a form you can reconstitute into
living things).

Intensive gardening? Maybe. But even that takes a lot of special
tools, seeds, know-how, and good weather. Can he carry what he
needs and have all the skills that can be developed only through
experience?  

Even if he did, he might not have any food to eat. Pestilence
goes hand in hand with disasters. Our modern age has forgotten
this.

But during a time when chemical factories are not churning out
the insecticides and pest poisons we've come to rely on, our
backpack survivalist  should be prepared for waves of insects
flooding into any garden he may create.

How good is he at making insecticides? Even if he carries out a
large quantity of chemicals to his retreat, how many growing
seasons will they last?

Did he truck out a lot of gasoline and an electrical generator
with him? No? Do you REALLY think he can create an alcohol still
from scratch in the middle of no-where without tools or grain?

Then he would better to write off  communications, lighting, and
all the niceties of the 20th Century after his year's supply of
batteries wear out and his vehicle's supply of gasoline conks
out.

I am afraid we have only scratched the surface though. Thus far
things have been going pretty well. What happens when things get
really bad? 

How good is he at removing his spouse's appendix--without
electric lights, pain killers, or antiseptic conditions? Campfire
dental work, anyone?  

How good is he at making ammunition?  Clothing?  Shoes?  I think
you'll have to agree that this hardly seems like survival in
style.

Even if our backpack survivalist is able to live in the most
Spartan of conditions & has the know-how to create plenty out of
the few scraps around him, he will never have much of a life
ahead of him.

Camping out is fun for a few days. Living in rags like a hunted
animal doesn't sound like an existence to be aimed for.

The bottom line with backpack fever is that, with any major
disaster that isn't extremely localized, running is a panic
reaction not a survival strategy.

Running scared is seldom a good survival technique and backpack
fever during any but a localized disaster (like a flood or
chemical spill) looks like it would be a terminal disease with
few, rare exceptions.

So what is the alternative?

A number of writers, from Kurt Saxon to Howard Ruff, have already
suggested it but I think that it bears a retelling.

What they've said is this:  get yourself situated in a small
community that could get by without outside help if things came
unglued nationally or internationally. 

Find a spot that allows you to live in the life-style you've
grown accustomed to (and a community that allows you to carry on
your livelihood) but which has the ability to grow its own food
and protect its people from the unprepared (or looters) that
might drift in from surrounding cities during a crisis. 

This spot has the ability to carry on trade within its borders
and has a number of people who can supply specialized products or
professional skills.

An area with two thousand to five thousand people in it along
with a surrounding farm community would be ideal but sizes can
vary a lot according to the climate and city. 

Ideally such a town would have its own power plant with a few
small industries along with the usual smattering of  doctors,
dentists, and other professionals.

This type of community isn't rare in the US. It's quite common in
almost every state. You could probably even take a little risk
and commute into a city if you must keep your current job. (In
such a case a reverse backpack survival strategy just might
work-you'd be bugging out to your home.)

HOME FRONT:

You do not have to miles away from civilization to be caught in a
survival situation

Natural disaster, civil disturbance or military action could cut
you off from all the usual services & food supplies.

Until they can be re-established you would be left to manage on
your own resources and skill. (Aren't you lucky?).

With no power supplies, central heating, hot water, lighting,
air-conditioning, TV and refrigeration (NO cold beer!) would all
cease.

Battery radios and TV would for a time give some news of the rest
of the world, if the situation is not global, but post telephone
& newspaper would no longer be available.

As main water supplies ceased to function, so taps would run dry
and toilets become unusable. (Rats!) Besides in case of Nuclear
attack the radios and TV and all electronic gadgets go plunk,
kaput! Unless deeply buried underground. No computer either!

In the countryside there would be natural resources to draw upon.
In large cities shops would soon be emptied of food, sold or
looted. 

And plants in parks and gardens would be rapidly stripped once
any private stocks had been exhausted.

The population would have to make forays out into the countryside
to survive, or abandon the town, if not in a siege situation.

Suburban dwellers have more vegetable plots and open spaces to
provide foodstuffs. They would be less dependent upon shops.

Those away from major centres are more likely to have their own
food stocks because they cannot shop at will.

But most of them will be reluctant if not dangerous to deal with.
Most families have some food in store. It should be rationed and
supplemented with whatever can be found.

FOOD STORES:   EC file*

Storing food is a good habit to get into, especially if you live
in an isolated place, which can become completely cut-off.

If you have a year's food supply in store and add to it as you
use it, you will not only be able to survive the worst, but will
be able to live at last year's prices. But you will have to
protect it.

The stock does not have to be established in one go. Build it up
gradually, taking advantage of special offers in supermarkets.
Buy an extra tin or packet and put it by.

Store your foods in a cool, dry place and off the ground.
Moisture & heat can cause bacteria and mould.

If stores are left on the floor insects and rodents will help
themselves. MAKE SURE that all containers are insect and
rodent-proof.

REMEMBER:

Rotate cans, so that the contents do not settle and separate.
Label each can or packet with a colour fast waterproof pen,
noting contents and date of storage.

Use in sequence, the oldest first. Store methodically and if a
label falls off, you should still have a good idea of the
contents.

KEEP IT SEALED:

Screw-tops sweet jars are ideal for storage and plastic
containers with tight-fitting lids can also be used.

Do not over fill them so that they distort & the lid does not fit
correctly. Use adhesive tape to seal the lids. Reseal after using
some but REMEMBER that once opened the contents will begin to
deteriorate.

RECOMMENDED FOOD / SHELF LIFE: 

WHEAT:    Indefinitely below 15C
MILK POWDER:   2 YEARS
HONEY:    Indefinitely
EGG POWDER:    2 years

SALT:     Indefinitely if absolutely dry.
CANNED FOODS: 3-5 years (replace regularly).
OATS:     Indefinitely
COOKING OIL: 2 years (replace regularly)

RATIONS:

Complete rations are available with various menus. Either
freeze-dried or dehydrated. They are lighter and less
space-consuming than canned foods.

Freeze-dried is Best for both taste and texture & retain minerals
that are lost in dehydration.

Although both need water for reconstitution they can in dire
circumstances be eaten as dry munch.

VITAMINS: *check for repeat** 

Multivitamin's tablets are a good investment. The body can store
up to a month's supply of most vitamins, then health will suffer
if they are not replaced.

In stress situations they are more rapidly used up. The B family
and minerals, calcium and zinc are the first to go. Vitamin
tables do not have unlimited shelf-life so check manufacturer's
instructions.

DRIED FRUIT AND NUTS:

They are nutritious and should also be included-raisins, sultanas
and currants all keep well. Nuts in their shells keep so long as
they are dry. Packets of dried salted nuts such as peanuts,
brazil and walnuts are highly nutritious.

POTATO POWDER:

Is a great filler for hungry stomachs and can be prepared in
several ways to make it palatable.

BROWN RICE:

Has more nourishment than long-grain white rice that loses all
its goodness when boiled.

STORE LOCATION:      EC file*

The cooler the storage area, the better the stores will keep. A
cellar is ideal but there may be a problem with dampness so:
 
Keep all the stores off the ground and inspect them regularly. 
If there is a skylight in the cellar, cover it. The store is best
kept dark. An attic is also convenient for storage. The stores
are not in the way of day to day activities.

However it may get very warm in summer & access may be difficult,
especially if a ladder is the only means of entry that may be
awkward when trying to rotate the stocks.

The roof is also a very vulnerable position in most kinds of
disaster situations. In an area where hurricanes can be expected
and attic is not a good choice.

In territory liable to flooding a cellar is equally risky. Under
the stairs is another area that may offer some protection, though
perhaps a limited space.

Advantage should be taken of wherever is most conveniently
available to store not only food but also medical supplies,
disinfectant, cleansing materials and water.

If you divide your stores into more than one area, each with a
variety of items you should be well prepared.

WATER CONSERVATION:

Do not waste water washing clothes, other than underclothing.
NEVER throw water away after use.

Allow sediment to settle and it can be used again. (Providing you
did not use soap or that its dust was not contaminated by
radio-active material.)

It is VERY IMPORTANT to wash the hands before preparing food. But
the rest of the body can wait until it rains.

The body produces natural oils, and as long as the pores are kept
open, health will not be affected. You soon get used to the smell
& social occasions are rare in crisis situation.

If showers are few and far between, use a damp cloth for a strip
wash. Cloths left out on the lawns or bushes over night may
gather enough moistures for a wipe down without using up you
water stores.

Injured persons MUST receive priority for bathing and all their
dressings should be boiled regularly.

FIRE:***

This note can and should be repeated in the chapter of fire
because of its pertinence. (Only the bold part)**

The warmth and comfort of a fire are great moral boosters, but
its most important use will be for boiling water and preserving
food. These MUST take priority in the use of fuel.

FIREPLACES:

Blocked fireplaces should be opened up again and chimneys checked
for obstructions.

If they are not clear there is considerable risk of setting fire
to the chimneys themselves and thus to the house. (Move Santa
Claus away and the Stork!).

TO CLEAR A CHIMNEY:

Tie a holly bush or similar shrub to a long rope and from the
rooftop lower the rope down the chimney (A stone tied on the end
will insure its drops). Now pull down the holly bush and it will
clear the chimney.

IMPROVISED FIREPLACES: 

Where there are no fireplaces metal containers, metal dustbins
lids and central heating radiators can all be used to light a
fire on.

In flats with concrete floors a fire could be lit directly on the
floor. If you have a barbecue stand use it.

NEVER LEAVE A FIRE INDOORS UNATTENDED. Even one in a proper grate
should be allowed to die down for the night, if no one is going
to stay up to watch it.

FUEL: 

Start with garden furniture, trees, shrubs, bean sticks, swings,
ladders, tool handles (not the axe). When these run out start on
furnishings, (Keep the bed & Chippendale for last?). Carpets,
curtains cushions will all burn
 
Cardboard, books & rolled -up newspaper will also give off a
surprising amount of heat.

All kind of vehicle fuel can also be burned as well as the
conventional heating and lighting oils.

WARNING:

Many modern fabrics and furnishings, especially PVC and
foam-block furniture, produce poisonous gases when burned.

If burning these items make a fireplace in the garden or if
forced to burn them in a flat, make the fire near an open window.

Cover the face with a damp cloth when you need to go near the
fire to tend it & things being heated on it.

FOOD: 

Note that in case of atomic war the following do not apply see
food special note in Atomic War for more details..** 

Check all the food in the house & ration it immediately. Use the
perishable food first. Fatty foods are the first to deteriorate &
canned foods the last.

DO NOT PEEL POTATOES. Much of their food value is in the skin.

REMEMBER that once electric power fails, the refrigerator and
freezer will cease to function-though they may take some time to
defrost, if you open their doors as seldom and briefly as
possible. Boil milk & it will keep longer.

Boil eggs or coat them in a layer of fat. If you have Inglass (a
traditional method of preserving fresh eggs) simply immerse them
in it.

Cook meat, wrap it in cloth and bury it in the earth. Cook pork
first (which has the highest fat content), then lamb, then beef
(which is the best meat to preserve).

Once a meat has been cooked & allowed to cool, DO NOT re-heat or
you may Risk food poisoning.

You can only cook so much at a time, so leave the rest in the
fridge or freezer while they are still cool places.

FOOD FROM THE GARDEN:

The vegetables with 4 petals, including all the  #brassicas#,
from wallflowers to cabbages are EDIBLE.

Hollyhocks though not very tasty are nutritious. Worms, slugs and
snails are also EDIBLE.

YOU MUST AVOID bulbs such as daffodils, tulips and * #aconites#
that are ALL POISONOUS.

FURTHER AFIELD:

Explore parks and open spaces for other vegetation and for
hunting and trapping wildlife. Bird life in cities especially
pigeons & startling will often fill the plate, especially if you
bait snares and nets.

CLOSER HOME:

Beware of house plants-some of them ARE POISONOUS especially the
Dieffenbachia* and Philodendron, though Orchids are good to eat.

If food is short there will be none to spare for pets & you can't
afford to be squeamish. If the aquarium water has to be drunk
don't waste the fish. In fact they will probably be the easiest
to eat even if you do not need the water.

The cat is next in the pot. Once dressed it will be hard to
distinguish from rabbit. (KENTUCKY FRIED KITTEN?) Gerbils,
hamsters, rabbits, budgerigars & parrots can all be added to the
diet & unless a dog is exceptionally good hunter, it should go
too. (Yummy, Hot dogs!)

PRESERVING FOOD: 

For method of smoking, salting and making pickles & chutney see
Food preservation in other file**.

FRIDGE / SMOKE HOUSE:
 
When the fridge no longer functions remove the motor, cut a hole
in the bottom, place it on some stones or bricks and with a fire
beneath it use is as a smoke house.

SHELTER:  

THE FIRST PRIORITIES WILL BE A SOUND ROOF OVER YOUR HEAD AND A
STABLE STRUCTURE.

Clear any debris & ensure that there is nothing that could still
collapse or fall from above and cause injury. Use slates, tiles
and bricks from other buildings to ensure that at least one
building is sound.

IN COLD WEATHER:

Conserve resources by living in one room, choosing a ground floor
room with a southern aspect (If you live in Northern hemisphere).

Block all draughts & avoid opening the door unnecessarily. If
there is a fire burning, MAKE SURE that there is adequate
ventilation to AVOID ASPHYXIATION or carbon monoxide poisoning.

Wear warm clothing to help conserve fuel and wear a hat. The more
people in the room, the higher the temperature will become. Rest
and keep physical exertion to a minimum.

IN VERY WARM WEATHER:

Use upstairs accommodation and spread out. Open windows on the
downstairs windward side and open all windows on the #leeside# *
upstairs.

Leave all the doors open and a cool breeze will blow through the
house. Rest during the day and do any necessary work at night.

MOVING:

If the house proves beyond repair, or other pressures force you
to evacuate, take ESSENTIAL items, food, blankets, tools, medical
supplies, containers for water & materials suitable for shelter
protection.

If they are not likely to be available. Use a pram or shopping
trolley as transportation. Either find an empty house or building
or prepare to set up camp elsewhere.

HYGIENE:

SANITATION IS VERY IMPORTANT during the aftermath of any
disaster.

Open sewers, contaminated water and the build up of rubbish all
help to cause and spread disease.

Germs carried by rats, fleas and other insects, rapidly multiply.
All kinds of waste should be carefully disposed of and all the
procedures described should be adapted to the doorstep situation.

PERSONAL HYGIENE:

Wash with sand if there is no water available. Don't bite your
nails however stressful conditions may be or put the fingers to
the mouth.

Don't pick scabs or sores and keep them covered. Change
underclothes regularly and wash them. (But don't use drinking
water to do so.)

EXCRETA:  (Not etceteras)

Urine is sterile but if large amounts accumulate they smell and
attract files. Use the "desert rose" of the kind describe in Camp
craft* .Keep the tube covered. If not used directly pour all
collected urine down the tube.

Build a latrine far enough from the house not to be smelt but
near enough to be handy for "emergencies" there will be many such
emergencies in a survival situation.

A box with a hole cut in the base can be used as a thunder box.
After use if there is water available wash yourself rather than
using toilet paper. Wash the hands thoroughly afterwards.

Fit a lid to your shit box, pile earth around the bottom and then
you will contain the smells and keep out flies. Move all shit
with a shovel & avoid hand contact.

WARNING, ANIMALS:

They pick up diseases that can be transmitted to humans. If you
handle animals, MAKE SURE you have no breaks in the skin or wear
gloves. Infection can enter through the smallest of cuts. Cook
all meat thoroughly.

KITCHEN WASTE:

All bio-degradable waste should be stacked in a corner of the
garden and composted to enrich the soil.

Compost heaps are also a great source of yummy worms, which will
add protein to your diet. However there should not be much
kitchen waste. The outer leaves of cabbages that you once
discarded, WILL BE EDIBLE IF YOU CUT THEM UP SMALL.

Non-biodegradable waste-cans and plastics that are not useful in
some way should be burned, flattened and buried. This stops them
attracting flies.

In warm climates burn ALL WASTE. Put all the ashes in the pit.

FOOD DISEASES: 

Salmonella and Shigella are diseases transmitted through the oral
or anal route by contaminated hands.

Sores on hands can be a source of entry for Staphylococcal food
poisoning with severe stomach pains, diarrhoea & dehydration.

Clostridium Botulinum is a frequently Fatal bacilli that can be
produced when canning at home if the temperatures are not high
enough. It grows only when oxygen is excluded.

THERE IS NO RELIABLE WAY OF DETERMINING WHETHER FOOD IS
CONTAMINATED.

So TAKE GREAT CARE if you do your own preserving. A related
bacillus causes TETANUS WHICH IS DEADLY.

SHELTER & MAKING CAMP:

SELECTING WHERE TO CAMP AND KNOWING  HOW TO MAKE A GOOD SHELTER
ARE ESSENTIAL SKILLS. 

You will need to make fire and to choose the right type of fire
construction. Shelter IS NECESSARY to give shade, to repel wind,
rain and to keep warmth.

SLEEP & ADEQUATE REST ARE ESSENTIAL: 

And the time and the effort you put into making your shelter
comfortable will make them easier to get.

If you are a victim of a plane crash or a vehicle that has let
you down, it may provide a shelter or materials which one can be
built, but if there is a fire or the threat of fuel tanks
exploding wait until it has burned out before attempting salvage.

If you are the unequipped victim of an accident, are trapped by
unexpected mist or caught by nightfall in terrain where it is not
safe to proceed or if exhaustion or injury prevents you to go
further.

You may have to make do with any natural shelter that you can
find for the night or until you can more fully assess the
situation. In this case, virtually any protection from wind, rain
& cold will be welcome.

If movement down a slope seems risky, traversing even a short way
along the contour may bring you out of the wind. If no cave or
crevice is available to give shelter, make use of any hollow in
the ground. 

Add to its height, if you can by pilling up rocks, but MAKE SURE
that any structure is stable & use a back-pack, if you have one,
to increase the windshield before settling down on the Leeward
side.**

If there is still daylight to see by, you have no injuries to
handicap you and are not isolated by unnegotiable cliffs or other
barriers, it will be worth seeking possible better places in the
vicinity. 

For a long term camp you should find a secure site with
convenient access to your major needs.

WHERE TO CAMP & WHERE NOT TO CAMP:

1)   Hill-tops exposed to wind, move down and look for shelter on
the Leeside*.

2)   Valley bottoms and deep hollows - could be damp and
especially when the sky is clear, more liable to frost at night. 

3)   Hill-side terraces where the ground holds moisture.

4)   Spurs which lead down to water, which are often routes to
animals' watering places.

If you are on high exposed ground go lower down to find a
sheltered spot, but on low, wet ground you will need to climb
higher to find somewhere securely dry. 

Look for somewhere sheltered from the wind, on rising ground that
has no risk of flooding and is safe from rock falls or
avalanches.

Hot air rises, cold air sinks, so valley bottoms will often 
pockets of cold air and in cold weather, be susceptible to frost
and damp mist. 

In areas that get plenty of rainfall terraces across a slope will
often be damper than the steeper ground above and below them, for
water collects there before flowing further downward.

Ideally you should be near water, with a plentiful supply of wood
near at hand. 

Pitching camp too close to water, however may lead you to be
troubled by insects and the sound of running water can hide other
noises which might indicate DANGER or the sound of search or
rescue parties.

ON RIVER BANKS LOOK FOR THE HIGH WATER MARK.

In MOUNTAIN REGIONS streams can become torrents in minutes,
rising as much as 5m (17ft) in an hour! Even on plains keep out
of old watercourses, no matter how dry they are. 

Heavy rain storms in nearby hills can easily send water rushing
down them in flash floods with PRACTICALLY NO WARNINGS. 

Choose ground that is reasonably flat and free or rocks and MAKE
SURE that you have space to lay out signals and that you can be
easily spotted by rescue parties.

Check above your head for bees or hornets nests and for dead wood
in trees that could come crashing down in the next storm or high
wind. 

Keep away from solitary trees which attract lightning, and in
forest areas keep to the edges where you can see what is going on
around you. 

Don't camp across a game trail- you don't want marauding animals
as unwelcome guests or to find your bivouac flattened by a herd
of animals  (elephants?) on their way to a water-hole or bar, but
stay near to any obvious human tracks.**

BEST TENT LOCATION: 

Erected towards the South will AVOID the cold wind of the North
as well as the rain from the East.

SHELTER FROM COLD: 

In an emergency look for natural shelter in your immediate area;
a shallow cave, a fallen tree, boulders.  

DON'T WAIT TILL DARKNESS FALL:

Make or find a shelter while there is light. You MUST get out of
the rain, wind, snow before Hypothermia sets in. Make more
permanent shelter when permitted.

If nothing better punch a head-hole in plastic bag (In your
S/Kit). Put it on & huddle out of wind, back against boulder,
tree trunk etc. Move legs & arms frequently. 

SHELTER LOCATION:*

If choice, locate shelter out of wind on high ground, not in
hollow where chilling fog will settle. Stay near forest if
possible. Trees are good wind breaker. 

Insulate floor of shelter as deeply as you can with brush,
leaves, grass- anything to keep you of the cold ground.

WHAT IS UNDERNEATH IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN WHAT'S OVER YOU.

Dig tunnel into snow if no other shelter is available. Use sticks
to keep air vent open. In deep snow, base of trees can provide
shelter. 

Use your imagination, improvise but KEEP CONSTRUCTION SHELTER
SIMPLE, DON'T WAIST VALUABLE ENERGY! 

WHERE NOT TO CAMP:

Common sense is the principal determinant to be close to drinking
water and firewood nearby at hand and to pick a spot as
conspicuous as possible to make signal if in case of emergency. 

We will AVOID spot that may be inundated by a suddenly rising
stream, particularly not if we are aware of the disastrous
results in some areas of storms not even visibly locally.

Warning tokens to be considered often include scars and debris
left by previous high water. So AVOID dry river beds which can be
flooded fast.

Lush growth may be not only rough and soggy underfoot but it may
presage troublesome insects. 

Also AVOID places where there may be cave-ins, avalanches, or
perils from tumbling rocks. 

If there are dangers of electrical storms REMEMBER that solitary
trees have a tendency to attract lightning.

Particularly to be shunned will be jeopardy from falling timber. 

Such trees such as cottonwoods and poplars are particular
offenders when it comes to unexpectedly tumbling limbs. 

The fast growing coastal pines of California are extremely
brittle & therefore, threats in every sort of weather.

Whenever there is any question, we'll bivouac among small growth
or in the open. 

That is where we will make any winter camps in treeless northern
regions, well away from lees where drifting snow can be an
insidious hazard.

DESERT & SHELTER FROM HEAT:

DON'T REMOVE CLOTHING!
KEEP YOUR HEAD COVERED!

As you find / make shelter, move slowly to AVOID excessive
sweating, waste of energy & dehydration. Stretch tarp, blanket
overhead. 

Don't stay in car, or enclosed tent that restricts air
circulation. If no tarp of blanket is available for shelter, find
shade under brush, shady side of car, boulder, ledges etc. 

Try not to sit or to lie directly on hot ground, which is usually
much hotter than air temperature. Above or below ground is
desirable. 

Sit or lie on brush, packs or other improvised elevation,
preferably with air circulation underneath.

IF? TRAVEL IS ESSENTIAL, MOVE ONLY DURING EVENING, morning hours
or during moonlit night. BEST to stay in shelter, put on aerial
marker, prepare to signal*. 

Leave shelter ONLY if you know precisely where to go, the length
of the journey, & limits of your strength and water supply.

DON'T venture far from established shelter, you could become lost
a second time.

SUMMER CAMPING ADDED TIPS:

Mosquitoes seem to hate the smell of Basilic try it out.*

THINGS TO AVOID:

1)   AVOID all damp ground or to be near swamps or marsh, as well
as damp tall grass and also #ravines# which can be flooded any
time.

2)   AVOID also isolated trees which attract thunderbolt, #vieux
sous-bois# which can provoke falling trees or branches, rocky
slopes which can bring rock slides.

3)   AVOID dead mass of waters and slow moving currants or
rivers. 

If there are a lot of mosquitoes try to find a place where there
is a good wind and well cleared area at the tip of earth bank
near a lake or on top of a hill.

4)   AVOID to be under the permanent shadow of trees, this may be
good when it is hot but when it rains then the rain keeps on
coming down 1 to 2 hours after the storm and it is hard to keep
your place dry afterward.

5)    REMEMBER to pitch your tent at least 1 HOUR BEFORE SUNSET.

6)   Sandy bottom maybe nice but they attract mosquitoes and sand
bugs crazy, try to find a ground with good drain system.

NOTE:     Camping MUST fill those requirement when possible: *
put in proper place*

1)   Wind sheltered 
2)   Offer wood for installation. 
3)   Offer wood for burning  

4)   Away from swamp, dampness.
5)   Close to drinking water supply yet not too close to bugs. 
6)   Seek Dry ground as much as possible.

7)   High enough to AVOID mosquitoes using air draft.  

8)   Tent facing East or rising sun position 

9)   Winter: Sheltered from wind as much as possible. 
10)  Winter storm ALWAYS come from West & North thus to AVOID.

SHELTER FILE:

Observe the usual wind direction & built your shelter in the
opposite direction and the fire in front of you. 

THE EASIEST WAY TO CONSTRUCT A SHELTER IS:

To fix solidly into the ground 2 forked sticks and to put across
a pole as a ceiling and then you lean against it other poles or
bunch of branches and cover the roof with grass etc.

ANOTHER EASY WAY EVEN FASTER IS:

To take only one pole and to lean it against a tree then tie it
then used pine branches or leaves branches to make the sidings. 

In a country like South Africa where one does not have poles at
his disposal, one makes a hay wall or using brushes in a half
circle so as to protect oneself from the cold wind and lights a
fire in the open section.

If the sun makes your shelter too hot add another layer of grass
or leaves.

THE THICKER THE ROOF THE COOLER THE SHELTER. 

If it is too cold then thicken the bottom parts of the walls or
built a small wall about one foot high around the walls of the
shelter. 

Don't forget to dig a ditch around the shelter so that the rain
does not wash you off or enters your shelter.

TYPES OF SHELTER:

It will depend upon local conditions and the material available.
Also on how long you expect to need it. 

For immediate protection from the elements, rig up a makeshift
shelter while you construct something better and more permanent. 

If you decide to stay put and wait for rescue, a more long term
shelter can be build and improved on as time and energy permit.

For those walking to safety, on the other hand, temporary
shelters can be built at each stopping point. 

They can even be carried with you if they are sufficiently light
and there is a significant risk that materials may not be
available at the next campsite.

A more permanent shelter will certainly be worthwhile for the
sick and injured, who MUST rest up in order to regain their
strength or where it IS NECESSARY to wait for the weather to
clear before attempting a journey. Use the time to stockpile
equipment and provisions.

HASTY SHELTERS:

If no materials are available for constructing a shelter make use
of any cover and protection that is available: 

Cliff overhangs, gradients and so forth, which will help shield
you from wind or rain. Incorporate natural windbreaks in quickly
constructed shelters. 

In completely open plains, sit with your back to the wind and
pile any equipment behind you as a windbreak.

BOUGH SHELTER: 

Make us of branches that sweep down to the ground or boughs that
have partly broken from the tree to give basic protection from
the wind, but MAKE SURE that they are not so broken that they
could come down on your head! 

Weave in other twigs to make the cover more dense. Conifers are
more suited to this technique than broad leafed trees as they
require less weaving in to keep out the rain. 

Make similar shelter by lashing a broken-off bough to the base of
another branch where it forks from the trunk (*A).

ROOT SHELTER:

The spreading roots and trapped earth at the base of a fallen
tree make a good wind and storm barrier, if they are at the right
angle to the wind. 

Filling in the sides between the extended roots will usually make
the shelter much more effective and provide a good support for
building a more elaborate shelter from other materials.

USE A NATURAL HOLLOW:

Even a shallow depression in the ground will provide some
protection from the wind and can reduce the effort in
constructing a shelter. 

However take the necessary measures to deflect the downhill flow
of water around it, especially if it is a hollow on a slope or
you could find yourself lying in a pool. Make a roof to keep the
rain off the and the warmth in.

THE DOOR ORIENTED SOUTH / SOUTH-EAST IS USUALLY THE BEST ALL
AROUND.

BED HUNTER HEATER:

To heat up stones and wrap them well then insert them in your
sleeping bag. 

BRION BED HUNTER TYPE 2:

Also there is the old trapper trick: Dig a rectangular hole, fill
it with hot coals which you then cover up with earth then lay a
blanket over it all. 

It is the ideal to sleep warm, or: Where you place your bed,
light up a fire for a few hours in order to dry up the ground and
to heat it up.

Then remove the fire and clean the ground, add green boughs or
canvas to the ground because ONE MUST NEVER SLEEP DIRECTLY ON THE
GROUND.

VERY GOOD BEDDING: (MMM!)

For bedding a soft mass of additional boughs sandwiches between
such waterproofing bark can:

FURNISH SURPRISING COMFORT EVEN WHEN THE WORLD IS RESTLESS WITH
WET AND COLD.

ALSO THERE IS THE OLD TRAPPER TRICK: 

Dig a rectangular hole, fill it with hot coals which you then
cover up with earth then lay a blanket over it all.

It is the ideal to sleep warm, or: Where you place your bed,
light up a fire for a few hours in order to dry up the ground and
to heat it up.

Then remove the fire and clean the ground, add green boughs or
canvas on the ground then make your bed on top, because one MUST
not sleep directly on the ground.

WEATHER PREDICTION:

Certain rules good to REMEMBER about this:

Sky Brilliant yellow at sunset = wind  / Pale yellow = rain  /
Clear far away sighting = rain past or to come./ Light cloud with
indefinite edges = nice weather.  

Thick clouds with well-shaped edges = wind.
If the birds fly low = will rain and wind.

Brilliant stars = nice weather coming. Night frogs #croassement#
= nice day tomorrow! OLEY!

When rain comes first without wind then = a long period of bad
weather with high wind and heavy rain.

But when wind comes first and is followed immediately by rain
then fine weather will follow at short notice.

ANOTHER INFALLIBLE WEATHER signal is the appearance of Cumulus
Nimbus cloud, a foreteller of thunderstorm.

While a greenish light in the sky preceding a thunderstorm is
almost certain sign of heavy hail.

CLOUDS & THEIR READING: 

CIRRUS = this is the mare's tail sky of the landsman, shows as
long threads or wisps of cloud.

This is the highest of all cloud formations and is a sign of a
high barometric pressure which means fine weather.

NOTE HIGH PRESSURE = FINE WEATHER:

However in cold regions where they gather in strong concentration
this would mean a snow storm. (RATTTSSS!)

CIRROSTRATUS & CIRRO CUMULUS:

In these clouds the former is a long wispy cloud and in the
latter rounded small cloud the typical "mackerel" sky. Both = a
high barometric pressure = FINE weather!

CUMULUS & CUMULUS NIMBUS:

They are the high white piled-up masses of cloud seen in summer.
When streaked with horizontal bands it is Cumulus Nimbus or
thunder cloud, a sign of coming storms which may be of a short
duration, or may indicate a change in weather generally.

If they add up on top of one another in shape of heads they will
tell that a storm is coming. Black and in shape of #enclume#*
then a big storm is on its way.

STRATUS & NIMBUS:

Clouds are dense and dark & low in the sky = rain & mist

CIRROCUMULUS:

They are #pommelees#* clouds which look like fish scales = rain
coming in the next 12 to 15 hours.

SUN CIRCLE: (Halo! LIKE AN ANGEL!)

A small circle around the sun = rains in the next 36 hours / A
large circle around the sun = rains .... 24 hours MOON CIRCLE =
RAIN!  NOT AGAIN!!!

WIND DIRECTION:

To find the direction when the wind is very light, just throw
some dust in the air or let it fall slowly, or small grass or
suck your thumb and let the wind blow on it to tell you which
side is colder = wind side.

The wind direction will help you to find what kind of weather to
expect. Wind that changes quickly in their direction will tell
that weather will soon change.

SMOKE:

From your campfire smoke going up in a thin vertical column =
nice if the smoke is going down toward the ground then = RainNN! 

DRY GRASS:

If in the morning the grass is dry = rain coming before night.

BIRDS AND INSECTS:

When the air is humid and heavy the birds fly low and the insects
fly even lower than usual = soon rain coming in same day even
hour.

The insects are more active before the storm but the bees are
more active when comes the nice weather.

LOW FRONT PRESSURE:

A front of low pressure often warned by light winds and hardly
noticeable while the air becomes heavy with humidity.

These conditions mean that the bad weather will last several
days. A low pressure is something you can "smell and hear". The
damp air stays low and then spread its wild smell, the sounds
carry farther and the sounds are sharper.

SIGNS OF NICE WEATHER:

When the wind during a storm changes direction = nice. When the
fog in morning disappears in the 2 hours after sunrise / When the
moon is brilliant & its edges are sharp.

When the sun is a red ball at sunset / When there is a rainbow at
night warning then ends of rain. When there is a good Dew on the
ground.

When the clouds are isolated & high. When a slight breeze blows
from West or N/West / When the #nebulosity# diminish after 3 or
4pm.

When there are heat lightning at night / When it rains with an
East wind and that the wind turns slowly to North East then North
= nice but cool.
Brilliant stars = nice weather coming /

When the sky is rose, pink, or orange or pale blue at night.
REMEMBER a quick storm will leave as quickly.

BAD WEATHER SIGNS: (Ratttss!)

When the air is real echo? When the night temperature is higher
than usual. When clouds move in opposite directions at high
altitude.

When there is fog in mountains = rain in the day. / When thin
white clouds (cirrus) at high altitude gather. / When there is a
circle around the moon or sun.

When the clouds become dark in the afternoon. / When stormy
clouds (Nimbo-Stratus & Cumulus) gather in West wind.

When after a nice weather period the wind changes direction. /
When the Cumulus quickly form at the start of the afternoon. /
When there is no Dew. / When the winds blow East or South East.

When the sun and the morning are grey and dull (beurrrk!) / When
the moon is pale, foggy and with a halo. / When the smoke rises
slowly & tends to stick to the ground.  

When dark clouds gather at the horizon and to the side where the
wind comes from. When the clouds are slow to form and that the
rain starts slowly then the rain will last many hours.
(Ratttsss!)

If the stars are real bright and numerous, the temperature will
drop down much during the night except if the wind is strong but
it will not rain.

When the sun sets in dark sombre clouds. When the moon rises red
it will wind./ If the stars shine little and are shadowed = rain
coming.

If the stars are real bright weather will change./ Lightning from
the South warns of rain.

SNOW: 

A Cree Indian saying: Snow like meal = snow a great deal.

NATURAL #BAROMETER#:*

Make your own: Take a piece of #sapin# *trunk about 3/4" in
diameter with a branch.

Remove all bark, easier when the sap flows then you nail it
outside. When the branch goes up = nice but when the branch tips
down = rainNNN!

REMEMBER:

Tent should face East to profit from shade in afternoon and also
to avoid rain and snow storm which ALWAYS comes from North and
West. This applies to  North America but * elsewhere? 

In the East it is opposite! Far East is Far Out! Far Away &
FAR-WEST RAMBOZO! 

WEATHER AND INFORMATION:
CLOUDY SKIES: 

REMEMBER this old sailor's chant: Mackerel scales and mare's
tails, make tall ships carry low sails. These (cirrocumulus and
cirrus clouds) are indications of stormy weather ahead.

Cirrocumulus do indeed look like the sky's covered with mackerel
scales etc. If the sky is full of both, rain within 24 hours or
less is almost certain.

SHEEP OR FLEECE CLOUDS:

Those white picture calendar puffballs or cumulus are camper's
delight fairly guaranteeing a beautiful day ahead except when
they decide to merge, forming bigger and bigger tall top-heavy
clouds, or thunder-heads, sinking visibly under their own weight.

When they start pressing down from the sky, they will bring with
them rain, lightning and possibly hail.

Usually they will darken at the bottom as they build up and the
rain they bring will be scattered in localized summer showers or
squalls under the dark areas.

The faster they change from white to black sheep, the shorter the
storm. Conversely if it's all day a coming, it will be around for
a while.

STRATUS CLOUDS:

Long ploughed furrows of white that go from horizon to horizon,
bring either rain or snow if they build up enough. If not, why,
it'll still be clear the next day.

The only way you'll know which to expect is to have watched them,
and the results that followed many times. Keep your eye on them,
you'll learn to gauge the future of the weather.

NIMBUS CLOUDS:

Are a sure bet it will rain or snow. Unfortunately by the time
they arrived on the scene it's usually already in inclement
weather.

They are low-hanging grey, shapeless mass, a misty dark overcast.
The trick is to be able to spot the beginnings of this low mist.

The first sign of its pulling itself together usually means
prolonged drizzly weather ahead. Low clouds in general bring bad
weather.

THE WINDS THAT BLOW:     GONE WITH THE WIND?

Wind brings the clouds and the weather. In many regions it's the
best indication that a change is imminent. If there's no wind,
there'll be no change in the weather.

Before we go any further, which way does a West wind blow? It
blows from the West. Here is some weather calling wind rhyme to
help along.

When the wind is in the North / The skilful fisher goes not
forth. When the wind is in the East / This is good neither for
man nor beast.

When the wind is in the South / It blows the bait in the fish's
mouth. When the wind is in the West / There is the very best.

FOLK SIGNS:

A ring around the moon at night or around the sun (in their
house) ALWAYS means it will rain or snow the next day. A small
circle 36 hours and a big one within 24 hours.

HERE IS MOST CONSISTENTLY CORRECT VERSE FORECAST PARTICULARLY IN
OCEAN, LAKE OR RIVER REGION:

Red sun in the morning / Sailor takes warning. Red sun at night /
Sailors delight. / When the dew is on the grass / Rain will NEVER
come to pass.

It's true that humidity at ground level has a strong relationship
to that higher up in the atmosphere. When you see a heavy dew or
frost in the morning, you can usually count on a good day.

If it's dry in the morning you can almost ALWAYS count on the sky
feeling the ground need to be moistened a bit.

While you're sitting by a camp fire watch the smoke. If the smoke
rises straight, the weather will stay clear.

If the smoke just spills over & hangs heavily around the ground,
rain is almost certain.

The prevailing wind in the region is a good omen. Look at the
leaves on the trees around you. They naturally lie so they won't
be ruffled by the wind.

Wind from a different direction than usual, however blows the
leave's underside up. Bad weather ahead.

ANIMAL SIGNS:

Wild things are much more sensitive than we to the changes in
atmospheric pressure and their behaviour reflects it, in many
cases turning them into living barometers.

Probably the best long range weather forecaster is the Elk. Out
West come fall, when the Elk decides to descend from their
mountain pastures. You know then that winter's only a couple days
away.

Deer in the Northern do the same but are not as reliable.
Migrating birds are another sign to get your winter camping gear
ready. If the geese come early, be prepared for a long cold
season.

BIRDS SIGNS:

If the ducks overhead are high, the weather will be good, if they
are low they'll be taking shelter soon.

In general birds will snuggle up close to a tree trunk rather
than sit far out or high if rain is coming. They will also stop
signing, rain not being much to sing about when you're living in
a tree.

FOOD:

ALL HEALTHY MAMMALS, BIRDS, INSECTS == EDIBLE! 

Yet beware of city & water and radiation contamination and
pollution! 

SHELTER:

AVOID Wind, high-water lines, poor drainage. Vent to AVOID carbon
monoxide.

NATURAL SHELTER =:

Caves; overhangs; between rocks; snow banks; under tree with tops
tied together; sand burrow; hollow tree; hole in snow around
tree; 

LEAN-TO:

Tarp or bark, snow blocks cut with knife or stick from trench.
Build sleep platform inside, drain, vents. Candle heat about 32
Fahrenheit.

WATER:

To SURVIVE 10 days on no water at 50F. one NEEDS 3-4 pints /day
and most can come from food. Look uphill for pollutants.

BOIL & THEN, Test taste water, boil 10 minutes. To be safe or USE
WATER TABLETS (Iodine pills).

ANIMALS:

Trails usually intersect at angle toward water, follow downhill.
Birds fly to water early morning & evening. Nervousness indicates
water nearby.

VINES:

Tree roots, thin branches, high-water content; stand sections on
end to drain in a trough. AVOID MILKY SAP.

WATER FROM URINE:

URINE salts like sea water = OK distilled, better to freeze it.-
First crystals to form are pure water.

SNOW-ICE:

50% less fuel needed to melt ice. Melt snow in hand or packed in
can over fire. Eating raw snow causes dehydration. Ice is best.

OCEAN ICE:

1 year or more old looses salt, is fresh (bluish). Find in
high-places where summer has thawed. Icebergs = salt free.

OCEAN BEACHES:

Dig hole below hi-tide line or behind dunes, use first water
seeping in-deeper water is salty.

WATER AT SEA:

Use solar still. OK to add a little salt water to distilled or
rain water for minerals. Salt water kills 1 or 2 days faster than
no water at all.

Salt water MUST be drunk as soon as possible up to 900 ML / daily
then use fresh water if any, from dew, fish juice etc. To balance
it out.

ALL EDIBLE SALT & FRESH WATER FISH HAVE SAFE WATER IN MEAT, CHEW
OR WRING IT OUT IN A CLOTH.

RAINWATER:

Collect all. Dew-wring out of blankets etc. laid open. Mop from
grass, rock, cacti or other surfaces.

SWAMP / TROPICS:

Standing water usually unfit, streams muddy. Dig hole 9 feet from
shore, let the waters filter in, strain, purify. (Halazone,
Chlorine pills are Unreliable.

ARID LANDS: & DESERT:

AVOID water holes where green vegetation doesn't thrive = 
(poison).

Look for water around vegetation. Especially Willows,
Cottonwood**

Low laces in outside bend or dry creeks (dig holes wait 2 hours)
base of cliffs, hills mountains, canyon heads.*

*Mineral stained rock; rainwater "potholes" in rocky places; low
places between dunes. Muddy water = OK let silt settle.  

CACTI:

ALL CACTI IN WORLD ARE SAFE.

Mash core, extract liquid, taste varies. Small Barrel (Fishhook)
Cactus & Yucca best.

PURIFY ALL ARID LAND WATER:

Because of pollution purify ALL water near any town, villages
etc. (Boil 10 minutes).

Alkali, mineral flavours nearly always present. OK in small
quantities, bleach through bag of sand; add charcoal or boil.

SOLAR STILL: 

In open, damp place use a 6'x6' clear plastic sheet over hole,
sealed edges, rock centre weight, bucket collects water
evaporated from ground, add vegetation pieces, urine. Collect 1
quart in 2 hours.

PURIFICATION:

Boil 10 minutes. Strain. Boil with charcoal removes bad taste.
Tincture iodine 5 drops to 1 qart. Shake it. For Iodine tabs
follow directions.

Bleach 2 drops to 1 qt stir, stand 30 min. Chlorine Tbs. to 8 qts
stand 30 min. Increase formula if water is dirty.

DAYS EXPECTED SURVIVAL IN DESERT; NO WALKING: 

Shade/    max.  qts: 01   2
120F                  2/1    2/2
90F              7/5    8/5.5  
60F              10/8   11/8.5

WALKING NIGHT ONLY:
 (Days/        Nights)**
  4    10      12
 2/2   2.5/2.5  3/3
9/5.   10/6.5   15/8
12/9   14/11    21/14

ORIENTING: BY WATCH: *

Hold watch level, point hour hand at sun. South is mid way
between hour hand and #12 in the smallest angle. South of
Equator: read with face down, mid line points North.

By SHADOW: 

Put long stick in ground, mark tip of shadow; 1 hour later mark
tip again, line from first to second mark point East, N/S line is
at right angle.

BY STARS:

Stars rise in East, fall West. Plot movement of an overhead star
by sighting across 2 fixed sticks (ex; if star on your right is
rising (East) you are facing North).

North star and Southern Cross remain relatively stationary above
each pole. (See picture later*)

TRUE NORTH:

Geographic North pole is "up" on most map.

MAGNETIC NORTH = :

Magnetic pole = that compass points to world-wide (approximately
1000 miles south of North Pole north of Hudson's Bay).

Magnetic Declination:

The difference between True & Magnetic North, in degrees East or
West of True North.

SOME MAGNETIC DECLINATION*** READINGS: (Approx) * = Degrees

US-Canada /10*= East, Adak, AK / 21* E = Anchorage / 30*E = Fort
Yukon, Whitehorse, NWT/ 10*E = The Pas, MB/22* E= Banf, North
Cascades.

20*E = Glacier, MT, Bend, OR  13* E = Yosemite, Yellowstone  15*E
= Los Angeles, Grand Canyon.

14*E = Cortez,CO / 13*E = Tucson AZ, Black Hills, SD / 10*E = Big
Bend, Texas, Liberal, Kansas.  5* E = Ozarks / 3*E = Ely,
Minesota  0* = Churchill, MB, Indianapolis.

Everglades / 1*W = Smokies/ 6*W/ Shenandoah USA/ 10*W=Hearst,
Ont./ 14*W= Adirondacks 

21*W= Upper Maine / 30*W= ST.John Newf. Schefferville, Labrador/
Mexico / 6*E= Yucatan 8*E= Mexico City / 9*E= E.Montery / 10* E =
Mazatlan / 11*E = Canyon del Cobre.

WORLD /10*W = London, Gibraltar/ 3*W = Mt.Kilimanjaro / 5* W =
Zurich, Chad /2* E = Istanboul.

2*E= Kabul, Afg./ 1*W= Mt.Everest 1*W = Honk-Kong/ 7*W = Tokyo /
1*E = Djkarta / 0* = Guam/  11* E= Hawaii / 10*E=Sidney,Aust.

15*E = Eastern IS.,Cape Horn / 13*W= Brazilia / 7*W = Manaus,
Brazil/ 0*= LaPaz, Bol./ 10* W = Trinidad / 4*E= Panama.

FIRE SOURCE:

Build away from grass, trees, overhead snow. Clear duff to
mineral soil.

FLINT/STEEL =: quartz, jasper, agate, any glassy stone.

FIRE FROM AMMUNITION:

Remove projectile, pour 1/2 powder onto tinder, reload shell with
rag wad, fire in air, put blazing rag on tinder

GAS/OIL:

With sand in can or in hole.

BATTERY: Spark from wire to each terminal.

BURNING GLASS:

Any convex lens; binocular, glasses, bottle bottom, bottle filled
with water, maybe carved ice piece: in bright sun, beam onto
tinder.

ANIMAL:

Bones burn, fat makes good lamp, warming fire.

TINDER:

Shaved twigs, dry leaves & needles, heart of wet wood, plastic,
dung, dry roots, pitch knots in old logs.

OVERNIGHT FIRE KEPT:

Cover coals with ashes, dry earth, will smoulder till morning.

TORCH:

Wrap bark cylinder or burn Pine knots. 24 hours Torch = fray end
of 1" diameter. Stick pitch coat, dry, repeat 1-2 times (pictures
from card here**)

KEEPING WARM AND DRY:

Build small fire, sit closer, keep warmer. Sit between fire &
reflecting surface. Sleep with feet toward fire. Fire is not
essential in sub-zero temperature if one is properly insulated.

CLOTHES / BOOTS:

Keep loose for better insulation, ventilation, circulation.

Perspiration = damp clothes frost; puff out air at collar &
cuffs. Beat frost out of clothes with a stick. Mittens are
warmest.

Melted fat helps waterproof boots. Bark pieces = good inner
soles.

Persistently damp shoes, socks can cause "trench foot" =
gangrene, infections. Insulate clothes with grass, moss, hay,
leaves, feathers, etc.

FALL THROUGH ICE: =  

Can kill in seconds; quickly roll in snow to blot up moisture &
for warmth, remove clothes, let freeze beat ice out, then build
drying fire.

SLEEPING WARNING & TIPS:

Sleeping in clothes holds moisture, chills body. You will not
freeze to death in your sleep; cold awakens you.

SNOW TRAVEL:

Burns 5-10 times more energy than staying put.

FAST FOOD: (Macdonals?)

ALL HEALTHY MAMMALS, BIRDS, INSECTS ARE EDIBLE; yet beware of
pollution. 

BEST SURVIVAL WEAPON IS FAT:

UNBLED, LEAN MEAT, PROVIDES ALL BASIC ESSENTIALS.
FORAGING = CAUTION:

Can burn more energy than gained, upset digestion.

INNER BARK FOOD:

Of Birch, Aspen, Poplar, most Pines, Slippery Elm, Cottonwood,
Willow, Red Maple, good Raw, cooked, tea. Store dried strips.

SAP:

Very nourishing, Cherry, Maple, Aspen, Birch, Hickory you can
live on this alone for many weeks. Drink Raw: Tap from hole into
inner bark, 2 gal. in 24 hours. Ingest via straw into mouth while
sleeping. Plug tap after use.

PINE:****

(Find all seeds and roots that are rich in fat and protein and
have them first in the list of survival plants..)**

ALL SEEDS IN "CONES" = RICH IN FAT, PROTEIN:

Acorn, Nuts, Pecans all good Raw, roasted, meal. If bitter leach
(grind, soak) out tannic acid. Evergreen needles raw, tea,
hi-vitamin C.

AVOID: Buckeye: * 
 
EGGS:

BIRD OR TURTLE (WHITES WON'T HARD BOIL) ALL GOOD TO EAT.

JACKING:

Use light to hypnotise frogs, game on trail, water-hole, den.

BURROWS:

Fan smoke or pour water in, wait with club or snares.

SLOW ANIMALS EASY TO CLUB:

Opossum, Porcupine, Armadillo, Marmot?*, Groundhog, roosting
birds, moulting Ducks, Lizards, others.  

FEEDING ON ANIMALS:

Drive away, steal their meat.

FUNGI:

AVOID ALL MUSHROOMS, PUFFBALLS, ETC.

AVOID:

Snails (parasite), Toads (toxic skin), Worms (grit, = NO food
value).

INSECTS:

Moth, Mayflies, Cicadas, Crickets Dragonflies, Termites = Very
Good.

GRUBS:

Wood-Beetle, Larvae in logs. Grasshoppers: Remove legs, wings =
GOOD!

LIZARD, FROGS, SALAMANDERS, SNAKES = GOOD to EAT:

Remove head, viscera, skin; roast, fry.

FISH:

Club or drive to shallows, barricade. Crayfish: Boil tails.

TURTLE:

Decapitate, bleed  well, boil to puff off skin; split under shell
in + pattern, declaw, disembowel. Wash all meat in & outside,
boil 25 min. more. When flesh pulls of easy cut up and add to
stew.

LEATHER:

Untanned: Good, protein-chew, swallow.

MARINE LIFE:

ALL SEAWEED (NOT THREADLIKE) BELOW WATER ARE EDIBLE, cooked; eat
slowly. AVOID if wilted, slimy or  odorous.

ALSO EDIBLE:

Sea Cucumbers, Urchins, Abalone, Scallops, Octopus, Aquid,
Limpets, Chiton, Periwinkles, Mussels, Shrimp, Oysters, Eels, (no
scale) Crabs, non-Arctic Shark, white meat of salt water Clams.

FISHES NOT TO EAT:

Black Mussels, sea Snakes (scales) Rays, Jellyfish, Portuguese
Man of war, fishes without scales, with irregular scales, tiny
mouth, sunken eyes, slimy gills, flabby flesh, bad odour, box
shape, bright colours, or that puff up with air.

SAFEST FISH:

Lie in deep water beyond reefs. PLANKTON-green slime under boats,
logs, rocks, EDIBLE Raw, dried. Party lived on this alone for 115
days.

DON'T EAT:

Plants stranded or growing on beaches.

ARCTIC FOOD:

Nearly ALL VEGETABLE = EDIBLE but! DON'T EAT:

Fungi, Baneberry, Lupine, Buttercup, Death Camus, False
Hellebore, Larkspur, Monkshood, Vetch, (Locoweed) Waterhemlock.
If eaten induce vomiting. 

ROCK TRIPE LICHEN = GOOD:

Raw, soup, tea. Leathery dark lettuce leaf up to 3" wide, around
rock. Grows into south US. Reindeer Moss Lichen also in US. Low
green grey plants, eat Raw, boiled.

ALL LICHEN IN FAR NORTH ARE EDIBLE, STEAM OR BOIL FOR SAFETY.

SWEET VETCH or Licorice Root, commonest root; in clumps on sandy
soil shores. Cooked better taste than carrot. 

ALL BERRIES IN ARCTIC ARE EDIBLE, EXCEPT BANEBERRY.**

SHARK:

Shark meat poison in Arctic only.

DESERT:

Apache warriors lived just on Salamanders, Mesquite Beans, Cactus
water.

ALL CACTI FRUITS & FLESHY PARTS = GOOD; RAW, FRIED ETC. REMOVE
SPINES, SKINS.

SEEDS that ARE EDIBLE:

*Pynion Pine, desert Serviceberry, Gamble Oak, Ironwood, Jojoba,
desert Gourd seeds, flowers. Mesquite = large shrub, small tree.

Straight spines & bean pods, fern like leaves, yellow flowers.
Seeds, pods = Raw, or cooked. Manzanita = large shrub, crooked
branches. Brownish-pink berries = Raw cooked, ground; acorn like.

Tumbleweed or Russian Thistle, young plant boiled. Joshua Tree =
flower buds roasted. Yuccas = flowers Raw or toasted.

Agaves (Mescal) = stalk heart like Asparagus, roasted. Fan Palm
ripe berries roasted, hangs in huge clumps off ends of branches.

PLANT EDIBILITY TEST =:

Limit diet to plants positively identifiable  or seen eaten by
rabbit, rodents, beavers, squirrels, raccoons, monkeys and bears.

Birds are not reliable. Place very small amount inside lower lip,
taste for soapy, bitter, acid, burning taste for 5 minutes.

Increase dose every 6-10 hours. If no ill effect in 24 hours it
is probably safe, but continue caution.

AVOID:

Those with MILKY SAP, (toxic) black spurs on grain (diseased) or
that look sickly. Cook if in doubt.

SOME EDIBLE PLANTS AMONG THE MORE NUTRITIOUS & COMMON IN
TEMPERATE ZONES:

MOST PLANTS HAVE EDIBLE PARTS. Taste test succulent parts of
appealing plants.

CAUTION:

Water plants absorb Pollutants. Starchy parts more nutritious
when boiled. 

GRASSES:

Blades with common base or stalk; be careful, high cellulose
content leaves are stomach abrasive.

NO KNOWN GRASS IS POISONOUS:

Eg; Wheat, Barley, Rice, Reeds, Rushes, Red Top, Millet, Oats,
Sedges, Foxtail, Crabgrass, Nutgrass, Johnson grass, Buffalo
grass, Canary grass, others: 

All SE grass; PLrc; *Legumes: Wild Beans, Peas = GOOD. Taste test
to be sure.

BERRIES: * Fruit & tea leaves = Blackberry / Raspberry /
Salmonberry/ Dewberry / Cloudberry / Strawberry / Thimbleberry.

Wintergreen: Fruit = Mulberry / Gooseberry / Elderberry /
Bunchberry / Whortleberry / Huckleberry/ Hackberry / Currants,
others.

HUNTING:

Look for dens, runways, feeding & watering places.

Best in early morning & evening hours. Stalk silently, slowly,
against or across wind, or lay in waiting.

AIM! WHERE?:

Deer, Elk, Moose = back of head, lower neck, behind front
shoulder (if you hit, don't run wait 10 min, till it bleeds
dead).

Seal = behind eye; / Musk-Ox = neck or shoulder; Bear =  Behind
ear, upper neck, behind front shoulder;/ Small game = head.

SNARES: 

Place snares, traps among natural obstacles; minimize human scent
by smoking your snares. Many small nooses-tie to limbs near
nests, roots.

Drawstring bag-squirrel bait inside; pull cord. Pole with nose on
end for nesting birds, fish.

BOLA:

Stones on end of strings, spun overhead and thrown at flocks of
birds, small animals.

FISHING HOOKS:

Pins, nails, bones etc. Flies, Shoestring, hair, Milkweed,
feathers.

BAIT: = worms, grubs, shellfish, insect, meat.

NIGHT-LINE: = String of baited hooks across stream.

DRUGS:

Crushed leaves & stalk of *Mullein, Road of Soap plant, Green
Buckeye seeds, thrown into water will daze fish, who will float
to surface; you can eat at once. Also: Burn coral or sea shells
to make lime.

TRAPS:

Build funnel trap or construct stake corral in shallow water
facing into current or toward high tide line. 

DRESSING GAMES:

ALWAYS cook food well for safety. Protect meat from egg-laying
flies (maggots).

SAVE ALL FAT: To cook with meat.

STEW GIVE THE MOST FOOD VALUE! 

BIRDS:

Bleed, pluck at once, singe & remove pin feather. Boil
carrion-eating birds 25 minutes to kill parasites.

SMALL GAME:

Cut skin around mid body, peel off to head and tail, remove feet,
head. Open belly from anus to chin.

Cut through pelvic, break open. Cut open rib cage; remove anus,
genitals, guts in one piece. Wash well.

BIG GAME:  (Dinosaur?)

Cut jugular, bleed (hunting people do not bleed meat); much
Vitamin C, prevents Scurvy.

Remove leg scent glands on Deer. Skin-midline cut from anus to
jaw, from midline out to hocks (rear) and ankles (front), cut
around each leg & head behind ears. Remove organs soon, don't
rupture intestine, gall and urine bladders (spoil meat).

Hang carcass for cooling before butchering. Halve between 2 & 3
ribs from rear. Remove from place of killing.

ALL PARTS large, small animal = EDIBLE. (AVOID Polar Bear and
Seal liver = poison, too high vitamin A.)

RABBIT ONLY DIET DANGER:

No fat will induce diarrhoea, starvation. Don't handle uncooked
animal in bare hand, danger of tularaemia (rabbit fever). Discard
all rodent skins.

BONE-MARROW-BLOOD =:

Nourishing in healthy animals. Calcium-chew bones ends.

WOOD KNIFE: = 

Elm, Hickory bark, shape. Soak overnight, fast dry over fire.
Sharpen on rock. Repeat many times. Gets hard as soft steel. Good
for skinning & light chore.

EQUIPMENT SKINS:

Scrape of all fat, flesh. Smoke dry over tripod over low fire.
Good bedding, etc. fur side out. Save bird pelts.

RAWHIDE: 

(Presoak if skin is dry) stake out, scrape skin side perfectly
clean. Wash (water or urine) clean, leave staked in sun to dry
1-2 days.

Turn over, re-stage, scrape off fur (easier if soaked overnight
in wood-ash solution) On soft backing pound dry hide with blunt
hammer to break grain, till white & soft.

TANNING: 

Same soaking & scraping as rawhide (Deer, Elk don't require
pounding). When dry rub with warmed brains, finely mashed until
saturated.

Roll up overnight. Next day re-stage & scrape off all brain
tissue. Work back and forth through a rope loop; friction dries &
completes tanning.

If used for clothing smoke over smudge fire until light brown
(will dry soft if it gets wet).

DRYING MEAT: 

Any lean meat; remove all visible fat-will or go rancid quickly.
Dry in the sun or 4 feet over hot coals (Use green hardwood never
resinous.)

DO NOT COOK. Keep from moisture at all times. Brush with salt
before drying aids preservation; pepper keeps flies away.
Properly dried keeps months.

Hang high from animals covered from egg-laying flies. Wash mouldy
spots (harmless) before cooking to eat.

JERKY: 

Preferably beef or deer flank. Cut 1 1/2x1/4" strips, any length.
Dry same process until shoe-leather brittle (12 hours to 2 days)
Will keep year or more in cool dry place.

PEMMICAN: 

Powdered jerky, mixed 50/50 with paste of dried berry (any) or
fruit pulp & melted suet rolled into balls.

Store in watertight material or dip in more suet for extra
coating. Will keep years; highly nutritious classic survival
food.

FISH-DRYING: 

Split down back or fillet; sun dry on rocks. Grind bones, meat,
add to stew, patties, etc. Don't eat raw. (Parasites!) 

SMALL GAME, BIRDS:

Dry whole, on rocks in sun; prop ribs open with stick. When dry;
crush bones, dry extra day dries marrow.

ROASTING TUBERS, FISH ETC.:

Pack in mud, clay; put in coals. Scales peel off with mud.

SOUP HOLE / BATH WATER:

Dig hole, line with waterproof material. Put in layer of rocks,
then red-hot rocks. (Warning! Water inside rock will explode if
heated).

STEAM PIT:
Dig hole, put in red hot rocks, 2" layer of grass (green) then
food, more grass; fill up with damp soil/sand. Poke hole to
bottom of pit to add steaming water. Many hours to cook.

RAFTS: 

3 long logs, STANDING dead wood (test float BEFORE)! (Bundled
plants, limbs OK!) Notch to fit or lash. Square raft will spin.
Listen ahead for rapids.

ROUND BOAT:

Stretch waterproof material over domed frame of Willow sticks.

RAFT AUTO PILOT:

Rock or pail trailing on short rope from front centre, keeps raft
in main channel.

PUMP DRILL: 

For stone, wood, bone, hard stone bit, jasper, agate. Use fine
quartz sand for abrasive. Or make simple drill by spinning stick
between hands.

SNOWSHOES: 

Lift line tied to front centre of each shoes aids walking or
straps on Evergreen boughs.

SNOW GOGGLES: 

Bark, clothe, etc., wrap around. Smear soot around eyes.

COOLING FOOD:  

Evaporator; works best in sun, wind. Pot holds water cloth stays
wet, open weave shelves circulate air or dig hole line with rock,
cover slab rock and sand.

FISH-NET:

Gill net, hammock, unravel socks, sweater, tie 2" loop; join many
nets.

PRESSURE FLAKING:

Strike blade piece off large stone, hold padded blade, use blunt
object to flake chips off with the needed piece & with twisting
pressure into edge of blade.** AXE heat slender willow and tie
with shoots etc.

POTTERY:

Find particularly river bank clay; coil or slab wall, even
thickness. Hardwood fire in 2 feet deep pit, built on & around
pottery. Remove when orange-red (4-6 hours); slow cool.

CORDAGE: 

Nettle; dry stalk fibbers; pound stalk, clean fibbers by hand.
Good yarn, string, snares, nets, rope, bowstrings, woven fabrics.
Milkweed; silky fibbers in dry stalk.

Dogbane (best in West) silky stalk fibbers. Hawthorn, Willow,
Elm, Spruce root, Rose; inner white bark good cordage, strongest
when wet.

SINEW: 

Long leg or back tendons. Scrape, sun dry till hard; pound it
till soft but fluffy will split apart.

KNOTS: MOST USEFUL ONES: 

Chair knot, Prussic knot, Eye knot or Fisherman knot, Log Hitch,
Square knot, 2 Half Hitches, Bowline, Sheep-Shank, Bow-Line knot
= (non-slip).

PACKING:

Suspend weight from hip belt or forehead; heavy items on top,
near body or pull along tied onto forked limb.

AIR RESCUE PICK/UP: **

One string with one end done with a Bow-line while the other rope
has a Bow-line knot around your waist & also around the rope
hooked to your foot, so they don't spread apart.

F/AID:  

GENERAL DESERT:**

Day-night temperatures extremes. Usually adequate Vegetation.
Great visual range flash signal mirror even if no target; large
fire at night. Keep fully covered from ultra-violet rays,
dehydration. Slow easy does it.

TRAVEL by NIGHT, SHADE BY DAY:

Brief storm flash-flood dry creeks, canyons. Anticipate dead-end
canyons, drop off.

WATER:

Base of hills /mountains/ solar still/cacti / dig hole. To
prevent sun stroke take 1-10 salt tabs daily with water.

FOOD:

Mesquite, Beans, Palm, Cacti, Nuts, Seeds, Herbs, Salamanders,
Insects, Small game, Deer, Antelope. Snakes, Spiders, Scorpions
in shaded places, crevices. ALL are active at night but avoid
man. Check shoes, clothes, bedding.

GENERAL TUNDRA:

Arctic plain, beyond forest line. Moss & Lichen. June & Aug
driest months. Short 50F summer. Marshy-water can't penetrate
permafrost streams flood rapidly.

Brownish surface water drinkable. Abundant lakes, ponds,
meandering streams, rivers. THIN ICE everywhere. Game,
vegetation, shelter, fuel at dangerous minimum.

Severe blizzards, wind chill factor. SWARMS of black flies,
mosquitoes, deer-flies, midges in summer but carry no diseases.

QUICKSAND AT STREAM JUNCTURES:

Foot Travel = Risky, exhausting, useless! Travel by raft no
matter, how long it takes to build. Mirages no prominent
landmarks. Most towns are on river.

GENERAL TROPICS:  (WORLDWIDE):

RAIN FOREST: Dense aerial canopy, signalling = useless, little
sunlight sound deadened, radio waves blocked.

TRAVEL: During day only. Follow streams, adjacent ridge-line
trails.

TINDER:
Inside large termite nests, dead wings in trees.

TROPICS DANGERS: = 

Piranha freshwater fish (20") in calm waters, devour everything.
Build shelter above ground. 

MUCH POISON OAK, IVY, DON'T TOUCH ANYTHING UNLESS YOU HAVE TO.

Large cats, poisonous snakes uncommon.

WATER BOIL ALL!:

Streams, springs, pools. Common liana vines full of water, cut
section, drink as is. Grapevine, Bamboo similar water. AVOID IF
MILKY.

Water in tree crotches; "cups" in large aerial leaves, strain.
Unripe Coconut milk = good. Hollowed out banana stumps fill with
good water.

FOOD & TROPICS:
Vary with season, locale. Best along streams, shores, swamps,
clearings, thickets. Sparse food in dense rain forest, cloud
forest.

ALL birds, animals, lizards, crocodiles, snakes,
alligators, freshwater clams, shrimp, turtle, fish ARE EDIBLE!

AVOID FROGS & COOK ALL FLESH!:
(Parasites!)

SEARCH CLEARING FOR:

Pigs, deer, coati squirrel, monkey, Iguana lizard  (1-5 feet)
good as chicken in Central South America. Bait for land Crabs
with open Coconut.

PLANT FOOD WARNING:

BE CAUTIOUS OF PLANTS WITH RED IN ANY PART.

Abandoned native gardens in clearings = good, berries resembling
strawberry, raspberry, blackberry are good as are wild figs of
any colour.

AVOID MILKY SAPS, except in Figs, Mangoes, Papaya, Breadfruit.
Spit out seeds of ALL fruits may be poisonous.

DON'T EAT:

Corral Bean, Physic Nut, Dumb Cane, Manchineel.**

PALM ETC.:

All Palm Succulent parts EDIBLE. Peanuts below ground good Raw,
cooked. Bananas: Raw, cooked, also shoots & buds.

Plantains like raw bananas, roasted or boiled. Sugar Cane-chew
inner stalk.

ALL WILD SWEET POTATOES, YAMS, WILD TOMATOES = GOOD.

Cooked leaves or Purslane, Pokeweed. Cassava (sweet type) root
raw, boiled.

ANY VINE:

Like Morning Glory* HAS EDIBLE ROOTS, shoots, leaves if cooked.
ALL FERNS:

Young curled shoots = GOOD.

BAMBOO = GOOD TO EAT:

Common, young shoots best, like Asparagus.

BREADFRUIT TREE:

(30-40 feet.) large leathery leaves; cook fruit 6" thick, rough
yellow-green hung at end of branches. Remove seeds mash pulp.
Staple for natives.

Arrowroot 2-3 feet tall, large coarse herb; 1-3 feet leaves;
green & purple flowers, white in tropical America. 2 lb. tuber
good cooked.

SAVANNAS TROPICAL GRASSLANDS

Nearly impenetrable thickets. Large cats, snake uncommon. Insects
bad, wasp, spiders, centipedes, scorpion most are poisonous but
rarely fatal, except black widows.

FOOD:

Little  variety in plant life. Streams much fish. Turtle bird
eggs, fledglings = fast food.

ALL GRASSES, SEEDS, NUTS, FRUITS = EDIBLE. Roots tubers tend to
be poisonous when raw. Squeeze out juice, cook pulp.


EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES "EC":  

WHAT TO DO WHEN PLANE CRASH ON LAND:

1)   Get away from the plane till all gas vapours are gone and
that the motors are cool off to avoid burns and also explosions
problems.

2)   Examine the wounds of the survivors and apply first aid and
as much as possible find a comfortable place for them.

MAKE SURE that wounded victims with back injuries are displaced
very carefully so as to AVOID further problems.

3)   Erect temporary shelters to protect from sun, wind and rain.

4)   MAKE SURE that the radio or signalisation instruments are in
good working conditions & near at hand at all time.

5)   Rest so as to recover from the accident shock & postpone any
other projects for a later time...

6)   Once you have rested properly, organise the survivor camp by
giving to each able body a specific task to do, even someone on
its back can be used as a look out etc.

Gather all food & equipment and assign a person to be responsible
for it. Construct a better shelter that will protect you from
rain, sun, snow, wind, cold, bugs.
 
Make wood provision for at least one day ahead and MAKE SURE the
wood is dry not from the ground but from dead trees or freshly
cut down. Look for fresh water, plants & wild life. Install
snares when possible they are your best bet. (See hunting #?*)

7)   Prepare very well your signals so that they may be seen by
any rescue plane or teams and ready to work at all time.

8)   Make a log book giving the date, location and cause of the
crash and the list of the party and their data and experience
which may be useful in those circumstances

Also make a list of all food and material at hand, weather and
all important data that you may find useful now and at a later
date.

9)   If you radio transmission works give as precisely as
possible your position using compass or sky or terrain
observations.

10)  If you have been thrown off the plane, go back to it, since
it is easier to spot a plane than a man or a group when possible.


11)  Don't leave the crash site unless you are sure to find help
near by. If you MUST go; leave a message telling when you left
and what direction you took and leave a marked trail.

So that if you have to come back or to help a possible rescue
party. Of course in enemy territory this does not apply.

12)  In Arctic region use the plane as a shelter. Protect
yourself from mosquitoes by closing all openings with parachute
cloth.

Cook outside the plane so as to AVOID carbon monoxide poisoning
and cook or make a fire well off the plane to AVOID gasoline
explosion problems.

Since the plane can not be used as a long term shelter because it
soon becomes an ice box then you will have to make a better
isolated shelter nearby.

13)  During the day in desert region the heat will be too great
to stay in the plane. Stay under the wings and make up some tent
using parachute tarp and other plane parts and keep an open space
at the bottom of the tent for ventilation about 60cm.

14)  Use sparingly the batteries for radio, keep them from cold.

15)  Sweep frequently the horizon with your mirror even if you
don't see nothing. You are the key man in this rescue operation
so MAKE SURE that the rescue team spots you easily.

DON'T TAKE ANY UNNECESSARY RISK. Better be safe than sorry. Be
alert. Have a rotation shift for the look out and security.

PLANE LOST AT SEA: SEA FILE***

1)   Don't blow the raft nor the Mae West inside the plane.

2)   Pick up all emergency material possible before leaving.

3)   Attach the life raft to the plane till all members are
aboard and one person is in charge to cut away as soon as the
ship or plane start to go down.

4)   If possible load the rafts directly from the plane without
getting in the water. Entering cold water will cause severe
problems of hypothermia and others as well even death.

5)   MAKE SURE that the raft is well balanced and know what to do
if it capsize to bring it back nice and easy.

6)   Get away from any oil or gas spread as well as the plane or
ship that sinks, the suction would pull you down with it. Direct
the raft in the current flow if there is any.  

7)   Try to find the missing passengers by checking wave
     movement.

8)   Pick up any material pieces floating around by tying them to
the raft and check if there are any leaks air or water wise.

Empty the water that is in the raft. Beware not to puncture any
hole with your shoes or any sharp objects.

9)   On icy ocean, protect yourself by erecting a wind breaker,
get close to one another for warmth & do physical exercise often
to keep warm.

10)  Check the state of health of each member and do the first
aid needed. Swallow sickness pills. Remove all oil or gas spills
that may cling to your clothes as much as possible.

11)  Attach all rafts to one another with a rope about 7 meter
long at the height of the floating line and when the sea is rough
shorten this distance. When a rescue plane comes by get all the
rafts closer to one another so they can better be spotted.

12)  After having read the instructions get the radio working &
use the transmitter /receiver only when a plane is around.

MAKE SURE THAT ALL OTHER SIGNAL SYSTEM CAN BE USED INSTANTLY.

13)  If need be you MUST quickly repair the raft with the
     appropriate adhesive material aboard.

14)  Compasses, watches, matches and lighters MUST be put into
     waterproof container.

15)  In the ocean under hot climate shelter yourself under a
tarp. Wear clothing that will cover your legs and arms and cover
your face and hands with solar cream and on your lips. Protect
your head and eyes from sun rays.

16)  Calmly??? Evaluate your situation and plan well an action
program to keep you all busy as much as possible.

17)  Water and food MUST be rationed. Responsibilities MUST be
shared. Rain water MUST be picked up using tarp or any suitable
cloth.

18)  Write in a log book your last position, the hour of your
crash the names of the survivors and their health condition as
well as the inventory of the food, the orientation of the sails,
the hour of the sunset and sunrise & all other needed information
for navigation purposes.

19)  Stay calm! Save your energy which will help saving on food
and water. Don't shout or move unnecessarily. Try to keep a
certain sense of humour.

DON'T FORGET THAT SEA SURVIVAL IS POSSIBLE ONLY WITH EACH &
EVERYONE COOPERATION.  to rpt in *** PSY

Use all means to be seen by rescue teams. Mirrors as well as
radio flares, signal panels MUST ALWAYS BE READY TO BE USED FAST.

20)  In warm seas one can survive many days without raft if you
wear a life jacket & have a mirror ready at hand for signal.

PLANE CRASH IN ARCTIC:

If Indians and Eskimos had accepted defeat because equipment was
not available these representatives' races would not be found
upon this planet. They survived and so can you; but you MUST
improvise.

As much material as possible should be taken from the aircraft if
you are leaving it. These materials along with those provided by
nature will not only assist you in surviving but also enable you
to live comfortably.

A piece of wood 3 inches in diameter and about 20 inches in
length may be split in a plank and fabricated into a snow knife
or saw.

Eating utensils may be formed out of wood, bone even rock. Any
material that is waterproof or animal skins may be used to hold
water.

SURVIVAL BY CAR:

More campers are accidentally stranded in their cars than ever
are lost in the wilderness. Washed out roads, rockslides and
blizzards often catch travellers in mid passage.

There may be mechanical break downs and human errors such as
running out of gas with your girl friend. (Old Trick!).

In back country this can be extremely serious even Deadly. Yet
the stalled car itself is a giant survival kit and in real
emergency can be stripped of many parts to ensure the passengers
well-being.

The sputter indicating an empty tank is a signal to get the car
off the road and stopped. AVOID running the system dry.

What little gas remains will better serve to start a signal fire
than to gain an extra hundred yards. Unless assistance is close
by it is better to stay with your car then to start walking.

In DESERT regions, use hood, door panels, upholstery an floor
mats to provide shade

Use hubcaps and sun visors as sand scoops. In cold weather many
of these articles make excellent blankets.

A tire burned downwind & at safe distance will keep you warm and
act as a distress signal. It will smell badly but will last for
hours.

A dome light cover or headlight lens unless sealed can be used to
concentrate sunlight and start a fire.

A headlight removed intact and rewired to the battery converts to
a powerful signal lamp. Use the electricity from the battery
poles to ignite a cloth soaked with gas from the carburettor line
or tank.

Dismounted rear view mirrors manipulated to reflect sunlight will
flash an SOS that can be seen miles away, 5 MILES AND OFTEN MORE.

Oil and grease are messy but effective sunburn lotions. Oil
burned in hubcap sends up a highly visible smoke signal.

Grease blacked with burned rubber and smeared under the eyes
helps cut the glare, think of football pros.

SURVIVAL PSYCHOLOGY: *** ADD NOTES

While it is true and vital that energy MUST be conserved, it is
equally important that the mind MUST BE KEPT BUSY. 

EXPERIMENT WITH NEW IDEAS (ALLELUIA) AND NEW PRINCIPLES. 
               (GO 4 IT KIT!)

Although emergency packs are most helpful it is of equal
importance to know how to use all the equipment along with what
nature has provided.

NUCLEAR ATTACK:  ***

We might be lucky to have a warning signal and if so then follow
the procedures that would be told by the authorities or simply go
to a shelter such as an underground garage.

If however you are in the target area then say a quick prayer for
your chances of survival are near zero even in a shelter
underground since the blast will suck up the oxygen & the heat
would kill you.

At a few miles from ground zero you only have 10 to 15 seconds
before the heat waves comes to you even at 25 to 30 Km the heat
would burn you alive.

At 40 Km just looking at the flash would blind you for life and
we are talking about a 5 megaton bomb only. Unfortunately man's
craziness will use 10 and more megatons bombs.

Should you be so lucky to have survived the blast and the heat
wave you then also have to survive the radiation's fall out from
which there is no protection unless you stay in the shelter for a
while from 10 to 30 days till it has subsided

If you are far enough from the blast you have about 5 minutes
after the explosion to find a shelter in a cave etc. to protect
you from the radiation fall out.

Here are some materials that will give you protection from the
gamma rays but taken in consideration that you are far away at
least 30 miles.

Steel: 15cm / Earth: 90cm  / Rock: 60cm / Ice: 1 1/2 meter
Concrete: 60cm  / Snow: 6 m.

If you have made a shelter MAKING SURE THAT IT IS DRY, warm with
food and water for at least 30 days for each member.

*** EM SURV-BARREL A NEW TWIST TO HIDE IN THE SAND 120LBS. MAX.
CONTAINING 3 PERSONS.

FOOD /MED /WATER/AMMO/CLOTH ETC. BASED ON THE BEST S/B KIT****

MAYBE BEST TO HAVE IT 2 OR 3 SUITS TO TOTAL WEIGH MAX = 40 LBS.

NEW PLASTIC ARMOUR: (In Nam they had the Kryptonite which weighed
13 lbs and was down to mid ankle.) Now!

Briton invents type of plastic that withstands nuclear blast.
April 13-1993 Toronto Star. London Reuter. A british inventor has
astounded the military and scientific world by producing this
type of plastic.

Businessman Maurice Ward a former hair dresser started
experimenting with plastic 20 years ago stumbling on the kind of
secret that nuclear physicist dream.

Rigorous tests by military research department both USA and
British have shown that this plastic can withstand simulated
nuclear flashes generating temperature of more than 10, 000
degrees Celsius.

So promising is this light compound that defence companies are
eager to buy into the project.

Experts believe that Starlite to protect civil and military
plane, for cabling in ships, to coat launch sites for advance
vertical take off and possibly for heat deflective coating for
space shuttle.

You MUST also have a radiation meter which would give you the
readings of what to expect outside. In so far as the use of
radio, TV etc. is concerned the Electro-magnetic-pulse (EMP)
caused by the atomic bombs will make them totally useless.

This EMP is like a gigantic electrical overcharged which will
destroy all communication systems except those deep underground.
Anything using electronic components from cars to planes to radio
to computer will go dead! 

So you can't rely on TV or Radio news, your car won't start etc.
All electrical station will go dead since they require some kind
of electronic gadgets to work or feed their power. Electricity is
the Achilles heel of civilization.

Very little is told about the effect of EMP mainly to AVOID panic
and partly because it is still a military secret, yet enough is
know to understand the consequences when you realise a total
electrical power breakdown. 

Don't count on the government or usual radio stations to help you
along; they are kaput. OOPS's!

You are on your own, back to the stone age with little or zip
left outside for survival, the wild life is gone and your chances
of survival through the nuclear winter that those bombs will
bring are slim if not nil.

Nagasaki and Hiroshima bombs were around 20,000 tons of TNT since
then our intelligent but unwise society has created bombs that
are 500 to 2,000 times more powerful.

The Rainbow bomb type is 50 Megatons. In 1994 the latest count
was 150,000 atomic bombs in the world for USA & Russia alone.

Coastal survival is even worst at the beginning since those bombs
will have wreak havoc of all seaports, tidal waves and earthquake
will have wipe them all out.

Think that a 2 megatons makes a 500 foot wave so you are better
off away from the sea shore for a while, if you think of building
a shelter near the sea forget it.

Stay in the shelter minimum 300 hours after the last explosion.
After 2 weeks the radiation dangers have fallen to 1/1,000. That
is if they have not used plutonium bombs in which case the
radiations will be strong for the next few hundred years.

Any survival is to be understood only if you were lucky to be far
away from ground zero of any bomb. If not then R.I.P. to you & to
us all.

Food will stay good at the condition that the containers have not
been open and were away from direct radiation exposures.

This is when a radiation meter becomes useful. Water does not
retain the radiation but fishes will as well as any surviving
animals.

Plants do not represent contamination danger if far away but use
only the deep roots anything above ground will have been
affected. Even roots after a while will become contaminated.
Water from spring or covered well remains good if far away.

When you go out after the 300 hours, MAKE SURE you cover all
parts of the body to protect yourself from Beta rays that will
cause burns like sunburn.

As for your clothes they will have to stay outside from your
shelter when you go back because of the dust that clings to it
which has radiation potential.

Radiation is not contagious but will affect specially children,
pregnant women, elder people and sick because it alters your
chemical constitutions. I hate writing these horrors.

Unfortunately town population protection is not good nor
sufficient in terms of shelters or even supplies, this maybe
different in other countries you will have to check your own.

When it will happen? Mostly before dawn and without warnings. As
I said before your only chances are good to fair if you happen to
be far away from any ground zero, far away means 40 km and more.

In the forest there will be gigantic forest fires resulting from
bombs that have exploded at high altitude.

These bombs will have a result that beside creating forest fires
they will suck up the ashes into the sky that will then cover 1/3
of the moon & 1/3 of the sun rays thus a nuclear winter will grab
us all.

THERE IS NO SUCH A THING AS A LOCAL NUCLEAR WAR.

When it starts it will spread world wide since most of the
defence systems are either automated or destructed by EMP forces.

All this was predicted in the book of Revelation but who ever
reads it and understands it, only but a few and they are not
allowed to speak.

You can safely assume that all CAPITALS of the world will be hit
as well as all major cities, airport, industrial zones and all
seaports because of tidal waves will be kaput etc.

Your best bets are the small towns but then again the bombs will
fall almost everywhere and the blasts, heat waves, radiations
fall out will be felt world wide as well as the nuclear winter
etc. (See Carl Sagan book on that subject of Nuclear Winter!).

If you live in a rural are away from big cities at least 40 miles
you may consider to build your own atomic shelter should you be
so lucky to be home by then and ready to dive into it.

Plans to build your shelter maybe obtained from the Dept of
Defence Office of Civil Defence The Pentagon Washington DC 20310
USA.

P/S: However most of these shelters are useless unless they are
either far away from ground zero or deep underground. (5 to 10
miles depending of the size of the bombs.) If they are near the
blast they quickly turn into deadly oven.

Besides that you must make sure you have your own oxygen supply
if you are close by, otherwise the blast will suck it  all up. 

3 EFFECTS:

An atomic bomb has 3 effects: Shock wave, Heat Wave, Radiation.
Full consequence of these effects is not known to the general
public and for that matter even to most scientists or military
personnel.

Beside the need for secret there is also the fact that we have
not yet gone through a full scale war with atomic bombs.

Suffice to say just for the record about a 2 megatons bomb that
around ground zero to the first 5 miles radius there is NOTHING!
ABSOLUTELY NOTHING LEFT.

From 4 to 8 miles NO LIVES and very heavy destructions, actually
the only buildings left to stand will have to come down being too
hazardous and we don't even consider their radiation level.

From 9 to 15 miles; some life left but if they were exposed to
the heat wave they will die since they are burned too deeply and
most of them have died from the shock wave that brought all kind
of flying debris flying, cutting and smashing everything around.

ANYONE WHO HAS SEEN THE FLASH IN AN AREA OF 40 MILES IS BLIND FOR
LIFE.

REMEMBER that we only talk about a 2 Megatons, the usual charge
for the average bomb that will be launch is from 10 to 20
Megatons.

So once can easily concur that the above damages will be
multiplied by the increase of power but there is a lack of data
since no atomic war has been done yet.

Yes, I am convinced that man is crazy enough to launch such a war
and will do so soon. If you don't believe me than read
Revelation!

Although most of our data is unobtainable for military reasons,
we know that most of the wounds are from the shock wave & its
consequences. The second reason is the heat wave that burned them
and the third is the radiation poisoning.

The forth reason is that all medical services are destroyed and
the fifth is that all transport & communications have broken down
gone kaput.

To this list we can add starvation, water poisoning, contagious
diseases from dead animals or people, forests fires as well as
building fires, earthquake, tsunamis, floods & landslides etc. No
needs for alarms as you see and we have over 150,000 of them.

In short; let us say this based on the Bible that at the first
trumpet or siren alarm there will be 1/3 of humanity  that will
die, 1/3 of the ships will be destroyed, etc..

At the second trumpet another 1/3 will die these deaths will be
caused by chemical, bacteriological warfare & by conventional
bombs and bullets from the remaining armed forces as predicted.

I do not wish to go any farther into the matter since time will
reveal more of what is to come, but we have had our warnings and
will get more before it all happens, those who have ears will
heed to the warnings others won't, it is their choices.

WATER & FOOD IN SHELTER:

MAKE SURE that you have toilet facilities, water and food for at
least 30 days, minimum 15 days.

The food and water will have to be renewed periodically to AVOID
lost and spoilage. Here is a list giving the time limit to which
you have to replace them.

Milk in powder or Concentrated = 6 months. Chicken, meat and fish
in can =  6 months.

Meat stew, vegetable stew and cereals = 18 months. Soups; meat
and vegetable concentrated = 8 months.

Berries in preservative jars 6 months. Vegetable juices in cans 6
months. Fruit juices in cans 18 months. Dry fruits in cans  = 6
months.

Tomato & Sauerkraut in cans 6 months. Vegetables in cans  18
months. Cereal ready to serve in cans 12.... In paper box 1
month. Grease & vegetable oil = 12 months.

Sugar Indefinite time. Hard candy and bubble gum 12...Instant
pudding 12 months. Nuts in cans 12 months. Tea, coffee, instant
cacao 18 months. Powder cream = 12... Oxo cubes type 12. Powder
drinks = 14 months.

Salt indefinite time. Seasoning = 24 months. #bicarbonate soude#
12. Water in bottle (sterilised) =  12 months.
 
Water should be kept in plastic container since glass breaks and
metal container can become rusted. Yet Bottled water is safe.

One litre of water per day per person is sufficient but you
should use as much rationing as you can, no need to use water to
wash yourself or the food, think that you are in the desert.

Water used from outside once you go out should be boiled at least
10 minutes to AVOID contamination.

Water does not carry radiation but MAKE SURE that the water is
free from radio-active dust.

You can be sure that many an animal or human has died in those
waters thus became polluted. If you have water tablet use them,
don't be cheap or you may die.

Should you find cans of food outside which are not radioactive
MAKE SURE that you clean the can well so that there is no
radiation  dust clinging to it. Any fallen objects in the water
MUST be discarded since it will be radioactive.

Toilets can be made from garbage bag, MAKE SURE they stay closed.
MAKE SURE you have a good first aid kit in the bunker along with
the usual medicine you may need.

Fire extinguisher in the bunker should be included also. As for
guns and ammo, don't you think that there was enough???

FIRST AID VIA ATOMIC BOMB:

One of the consequences of those bombs is to project radiations
of two types Beta and Gamma.

The first one cause burns the second goes Very deep in your body
system and is contracted from any outside objects that were in
the path of the bomb.

So you MUST protect your skin by covering it and if your skin
gets in contact with those objects wash it, but NEVER use soap.

Gamma rays can be shielded with proper thickness of different
material as see above in page # *, as for the Beta rays they
don't penetrate deep & can only cause skin *lesions.

There is a great risk for internal injuries even death if one
swallows water, fluids or food that was contaminated by
radiation. Any open sore is an open invitation to contamination,
cover it.

ACUTE SYMPTOMS FROM RADIATION POISONING:

1)   If you have nausea and throwing up nearly immediately after
     the blast, it means death within a week.

2)   If nausea and throw up in less than 2 hours, certain death
     from 2 to 4 weeks with invalidity during that time.   

3)   If nausea and throw up in less than 4 hours, certain death
     in 3 to 4 weeks after the blast.

4)   If no symptoms show up there are still Important risks which
could appear later on, pregnant women will abort and all kinds of
genetic defects and malformations will follow!

Radiation sickness is not contagious but on the other hand one
MUST not handle any object which was contaminated.

Radiation level decreases fast, after 12 hours it is down to 90%
and after 3 days it is down to 99% unless plutonium was used,
then forget it.

It means centuries of deadly contaminations. Yes they have many
of those dirty bombs and some will be used unfortunately. *** put
all atomic in 1 place.

NATURAL DISASTERS: # 309

Many of them can be forewarned like hurricanes and tornadoes or
heavy snow storms for those you should listen to the radio news
and to know how to cut your water, gas or electrical power should
you have to do so.

Checking that you have a good fire fighting extinguisher and a
good first aid kit ready at hand.

Your local Red Cross section can supply you with all the needed
information on almost all medical emergencies & what you would
need then

MAKE SURE that you ALWAYS have a good provision of food not
requiring to be frozen nor cooked. Those cans of food along with
an airtight water jar, some blankets or sleeping bags, clothes. 

A portable radio and flashlight with extra batteries fully loaded
as well as camping accessories would help you in case of
emergencies. A list of this equipment can be found in file**.

A car fully loaded with gasoline and ready to go should you have
to leave, would be helpful.

All you would then have to do is to throw your emergency kit in
the car and drive off to a secure spot that you should have found
before or just by following the instructions that could come from
local radio station & authorities 

If this is the case take the roads that have been recommended
rather than try you own luck and go to the nearest shelter
provided for you in those cases.

Don't forget to cut off you water, gas and electrical supply
before leaving.

FLOOD:  (Noah???)

1)   Following the information received you will know ahead of
     time if you house is above or below the possible flood.

2)   Facing a possible flood don't stack bags of sand outside
your house hoping to contain the flood from getting into your
basement you won't.

The water can seep under your house, just let the basement flood
itself or even better flood it with clean water yourself when you
are certain that the flood can not be AVOIDED.

This will permit you to counteract the effect of the water
pressure on the outside walls of your house thus you will prevent
further structural damages to your foundation.

3)   Gather a good water supply in air tight containers since the
water from the flood will be contaminated and unfit to use unless
you boil it first at least 10 minutes.

4)   Get you furniture and electrical appliances from the
basement up to the first floor or even in the attic.

Unplug all electrical equipments unless you are wet and have both
feet in the water AVOIDING this way your own electrocution.

Lock all doors and windows and leave the area as soon as
possible. Don't wait for the flood to reach you since you could
be stuck for days and could be in further danger for your life.

5)   Upon flooded road drive in first gear only and drive slowly
so as not to flood the motor, your breaks once wet will cease to
function so beware.

6)   If you were caught in your house when the flood hits you
then if the water rises in the house climb up on the roof and if
the house collapses find something that you can grasp and float
upon which you can take some refuge. "Call Noah's Ark."

7)   If you have made a raft or have a boat then offer help
around. Don't forget to wear you life jacket.

8)   Once the water has subsided it is not prudent to enter your
house right away, it could collapse, check it first.

9)   Avoid all direct contact with someone who is drowning; since
he can drown you with him. First throw him a plank or rope to
which he can hold on to, then go to his or her rescue.

10)  IN WINTER if someone has broken into the ice then throw him
a rope or cloth then lower yourself flat on the ice so as to
spread your weight over a maximum area & try to pull him out.

If there are other persons around use them to form a human chain
where they all lay down flat on the ice holding on to one another
to pull the victim off the ice hole while those on the shore are
used as anchor to those on the ice.

TORNADOES:

1)   Listen carefully to the radio , TV news cast.

2)   Check carefully what is happening in the sky specially in
the South and South West area. If there is to be a tornado before
a HURRICANE then you MUST check the East.

3)   If you see clouds in the shape of a funnel call immediately
the police & weather station to warn them of this information.

4)   If possible seek shelter in the basement. If you have time
MAKE SURE that your windows are partly open on the opposite side
of the tornado otherwise the pressure from the wind will make
them blow off in all directions.

5)   If you can move then do so by going at right angle from the
path of the tornado and move fast.

6)   If you have no means of escape then throw yourself down into
any ditch or other kind of terrain depression & start praying.

7)   In a public office building the basement is your best bet.
Flee from any floor above ground level, find a place with thick
wall.

8)   In a house the basement in its deepest ground is the SAFEST.
If you live in an area where those tornadoes are frequent it is
wise to reinforce your basement or to build a shelter.

9)   If there is no basement in this house then go to the lower
floor and pull a sofa or heavy piece of furniture over you this
sofa etc. should be put in the middle of the house. Don't forget
the advice about the windows being partly open.

10)  A mobile home is a poor shelter and can be wrecked easily
better to get out and hide in a ditch. The damages can be
lessened if you have taken time to install cables to cement block
as a mean of anchorage before the tornado hit you.

HURRICANE:

1)   If your house is located on high ground, seek refuge
elsewhere.

2)   Before the storm hits, carry inside all possible objects
that could be lifted by the storm and become deadly weapons.
Tools garbage cans, outside furniture can hurt you even kill you.

3)   Nail boards over your windows.

4)   If the centre of the hurricane goes directly over you, there
will be a period of calm from a few minutes up to an hour.

Don't go out and stay in your shelter since the wind will pick up
again even with more strength even from another direction. Stay
inside till the hurricane has left.

5)   The inside of a car is not a good shelter but it can be used
in emergency your best bet is to crawl under the car to protect
yourself. Staying in the car could be lethal.

6)   Follow the emergency procedures mentioned in Flood &
Tornado. Escaping disaster is ALWAYS a question of good
judgement.

EARTHQUAKE:

1)   Keep calm and stay cool, don't run or go any place without
     goal.

2)   Stay where you are either inside or outside, most of the
wounds happen to people trying to get out or in a building. If
you are close to a building move away to a safer place.

3)   Inside a building, hide under a heavy furniture, stay away
from windows, stay close to a central wall or inside a door
frame. Stay away from doors leading outside.

4)   Don't use candles or matches during or after the quake and
put out any fires.

5)   If outside stay away from any buildings or any electrical
cables, stay where you are till the end of the earthquake.

6)   Don't run near or across any building since the dangers of
being hit by falling objects are much greater outside when you
are near entrance doors or along walls.

7)   If you are in a moving car, stop as soon as possible but
don't get out of it even if you are shaken a bit. If you are
under a bridge or a tunnel try to get away from it & then stop.

TSUNAMI: #Raz de maree#

Earthquake can produce them. Atomic bombs that have exploded
under water near the shore will do it all the time.

1)   Get away from shore line as quickly as possible at least 1/2
mile if not more whenever you can.

2)   A Tsunami is not made of a single wave but of a series of
them getting bigger and bigger than of a series of smaller ones.
Stay away till the authorities give you the all clear signal.

3)   NEVER go near the beach to enjoy the view. If you see the
wave, it is then too late to seek shelter, IT MOVES AT 300 MPH.

4)   Follow all instruction coming from local authorities it is
     not the time to play the hero. Be prudent.

LIGHTNING:

1)   Seek refuge in a building, inside a car is safe; unless it
     is a convertible car.

2)   Inside a  building don't use your phone unless for
     emergency.

3)   If outside and you can't find a shelter here is what to do:
Avoid to stick out like a sore thumb by being the tallest point
of your surrounding environment.

Ex; being on top of a mountain or in a flat field or in a small
boat. If you are in a big boat stay inside.

In a field lay down on your stomach. Don't go near any
motorcycle, golf cart and drop your golf club.

4)   Stay away from fences or any metallic tubes or cables or
lone tree in an open field, this tree will attract lightning.

In an open field don't seek shelter in an isolated shack. In a
forest seek shelter in lower ground under heavy brush.

In the country seek shelter in a *ravine or valley and beware of
heavy rain which will flood gullies.

In the middle of field if you suddenly feel your hair rising 
sure sign that a lighting will strike, throw yourself on your 
knees, your hands on your knees, don't lay flat on the ground.

5)   Victims of lightning bolts will suffer a terrible electrical
shock that can give them burns but not ALWAYS. They are not
however carrying electricity thus can be safely attended.

It is even possible to reanimate someone that you may think was
killed by the lightning. If there was a group of persons that was
hit, then bring help first to those who seem dead.

6)   According to the Red Cross when a victim does not breath you
MUST give her the artificial respiration mouth to mouth at the
rhythm of one blow per 5 seconds and 3 seconds for kids* till a
doctor comes along.

THIS MUST BE DONE IMMEDIATELY.

7)   Victims who are only stunned by the shock still have to be 
attended they can suffer from burns at the fingers, toes near
their belt or under their jewelleries.

FOREST FIRE:

1)   Upon crossing a dry forest, listen often to any radio news
bulletin to see if there are any major fires in your region.

2)   If you don't have a radio, check the mountains top and if
you see dark clouds that are nearly immobile then change
direction. Often the wind will bring you the smell confirming the
fire.

3)   On foot in a forest it is useless to try to escape a major
forest fire your best bet is to throw yourself in the closest
water lake or river even pound.

If you have time you can build a burned zone near the pound
acting as a kind of buffer zone. Keep your clothes and body
ALWAYS wet.

Stones near the river or shore will become very hot afterward
stay away from them.

4)   Don't panic only a fire of extreme intensity can make the
water of a pound or stagnant water boiling hot even if this
marshy water has very little depth.

5)   Breath through a wet cloth to AVOID BREATHING SMOKE.

6)   A fire burns a lot of oxygen around so don't move and try to
breath as normally as you possibly can.

7)   If you are in a small bush fire and that it is impossible to
reach a nearby water you can try to build a buffer zone of burned
area around you but this does not work in a major forest fire
with walls of fire around you.* 

8)   Avoid at all cost to seek shelter in a cave! Because the
smoke will either kill you or the you will die by lack of oxygen
if not by excessive heat.

WILDFIRE & FIRE SHELTER:

REMEMBER that great fires create their own rules, even their own
weather. For example a fire goes faster up the hill than
downward.

A fire shelter is an aluminium tent about 2 1/2 meters long and a
metre wide. When a fire fighter is caught in the advance of a
raging wildfire, his shelter maybe his last chance.

He clears an area as well as he can and gets under the shelter.
He waits there, face down in the dirt, as the fire roars over
him.

The fire fighters call the shiny aluminum shelter his "shake and
bake" Time spent under it is like time spent in hell.

Here is a true story about this. In 1985 in Idaho's Butte fire,
73 fire fighters were caught by a fire from that raced through
three kilometres of forest in 15 minutes. When it overtook the
fire fighters, it was 30 story high and looked like a bright
orange sun exploding.

The fire fighters got under their shelters and for the next hour
the fire roared around them. Hot winds whipped at the shelters,
ripping holes that let the heat and light through.

The fire fighters pressed their faces to the earth, and prayed.
Between the blasts of fire, they called out to one another. They
talked about how they loved their families and girlfriends.

After an hour, the fire let up. The forest was blackened -
"toast" in the fire fighters vernacular. Near the shelters, now 
covered with a fine white ash, the handles of shovels had been
burned clean away. 

BUT ALL 73 FIRE FIGHTERS HAD SURVIVED.

WHAT TO DO AFTER A DISASTER HAS HIT:

One of the first thing to do is to work at getting things back in
order, to establish control and set priorities.

FIRST IS TO GET THE FIRST-AID TO TRY TO SAVE AS MANY PEOPLE AS
POSSIBLE.

A system of #triage# MUST be establish to separate the cases and
to realise that time spent for a grievously case is time lost for
others not so badly hurt.

I know it sounds cruel to say but it is better to take care of
the lesser injuries than those who will die soon.

This way a #secourist# can save many lives where as if he was to
concentrate on one then 10 more would die.*

What is more URGENT is to gather, find food, shelter and first
aid and ensure the protection to all survivors as much as
possible, to organise teams to help you help others in need.

1)   Don't enter a building unless using EXTREME CAUTION. This
building can collapse without warning.

2)   Once inside check if there is any gas leak or electrical
short circuit.

3)   Don't enter any building while smoking or with any burning
material ex; candles.A gas leak could make it all blow up.

4)   Stay away from any fallen or broken electrical cable.

5)   In a house if you smell any gas odour, open quickly all
doors and windows, close the main gas valve and leave the house
immediately.

Warn the police or firemen or gas CIE and don't go back into the
house until you are told to do so.

6)   If there are electrical appliances that are wet cut the
electrical, unplug those appliances & dry them off then you can
put the electricity back on.

CAUTION:  Don't do any of this if you are wet or have your feet
in the water.

7)   If your electrical fuses blow up, cut off the electricity
and find the cause of the short circuit before doing anything
else

8)   After a long period without electricity the frozen food can
be bad don't eat it. Nor should you eat food that was under water
from a flood unless it is in a can. Follow all the instructions
of the authorities concerning food and water supply.

9)   When possible seek shelter and information from Red Cross
where you will ll find clothing, food and first aid.

10)  In order to help the work of #secourist# stay away from
sinister area unless you are asked or can be of help.

11)  Unless emergency don't use your automobile nor phone.

12)  Report to authorities all events which you were a witness.

13)  Once the emergency state has passed then contact your family
members. This way you reassure them & avoid this way time money &
anxieties to those who are trying to locate you.

14)  Don't be a carrier of rumours that you ears, you will only
add to the confusion and multiply the problems.

BUILDINGS RESCUE:

The type of building construction and its distance away from any
bombs, flood, earthquake, hurricanes etc. will determine its
damages but they are basically the same except for radiations.

One MUST BE SURE that the walls are badly shaken & that the
floors can give away at any time without warnings. Don't let
people without knowledge do the searchings, since they can cause
further collapses.

There are several types of collapsing and often they will form
empty spaces under it where people can be trapped but still live
for a while. So:

YOU MUST KNOW WHERE TO LOOK FOR THEM.

When the floors collapse on one side, the empty space is under
its highest level, often big enough and easy to access.* 

The floor can collapse by its middle which forms in its centre a
pile of #rubbish# in a "V" form and on each side there is an
empty space see pix **

Other type is when the centre of the floor holds on but it is the
two sides which collapse forming an empty space in an "A" shape,
these spaces are harder to reach. pix**

Last type is when the walls open up and the floor comes straight
down, often there are furniture which will stop the floor from
total collapse leaving an empty space that is very shallow.

This type of empty space is very hard to reach and presents great
risk since the whole building can collapse over the rescue party.
 
PRECAUTIONS TO TAKE:

NEVER get into any buildings no matter how URGENT the cause
without having taken the advice of the proper authorities or
without having made a very careful inspection to spot dangers.

This delay may sound improper but it is well worth to know before
hand what you are getting into & work in teams as much as
possible or let someone knows where you went.

First check the immediate localities of the building and call to
see if there are any persons in the building. Don't forget that
you will be of no use to anyone if you become a victim yourself.
Ask around if anyone knows about people missing in this building.

Maintain contact with those inside which you can hear or see but
that you can not reach immediately and reassure them.

Once you have decided to enter a building check for dangerous
walls, also the doors that are either blocked or obstructed.

Verify carefully for weaken stairs and any objects that are
sticking out such as glass, sharp pieces of wood or metals,
nails, gas leak, flooded basement and loose wiring.

Walk in very slowly and watch each step carefully. Walk along the
walls. Walk backward and along the walls when you go down stairs.

LIST OF DON'T:

DO NOT pull any material sticking out, it could cause collapses.
DO NOT smoke nor light any matches, use flashlights. DO NOT touch
any wiring or use a dry stick to AVOID problems.

DO NOT throw rubble left and right but in one pile. DO NOT trust
anything and be quick yet be very prudent. Wear gloves, safety
hat and safety boots if you have any.

FIRST AID NOTE: 2RPT NOTE IN F/AID 

WARNING  UTMOST IMPORTANT!!!: 

                         BEFORE!!! 

LIBERATING A VICTIM THAT WAS STUCKED UNDER THE COLLAPSE.

          MAKE SURE YOU GIVE HIM TO DRINK DURING RESCUE, 
               AT LEAST A QUART OF WATER.

               ALWAYS DO THIS, IF YOU FORGET IT, 
               THE VICTIM COULD DIE FROM SHOCK.

RHEUMATISM REMEDY = "BONE OIL":

Taken from Russian Pilgrim P.92

This is a very old remedy yet no one seem to know of it. It could
be very useful for those who suffer from it. Dated 1430 AD.

"The old man started to treat me. He went out to gather in the
fields & around the barns in the yards & garbage dumps a full
bucket of old animal bones birds bones etc. all kind of old
bones.

Then he washed them broke them in small pieces with a stone & put
them all in a big cooking pot that he covered with a top that had
a hole in the middle, then he turned it upside down over a
smaller vase that he had beforehand buried in the soil.

He then carefully smeared a heavy coat of clay the bottom part of
this big cooking pot & then he covered the pot with wood logs
that he sat on fire letting it burn for 24 hours.

While so doing, he was saying to himself "this will make a fine
bone oil tar." The day after, he dug out the vase that was in the
soil this vase had about 1 litre of red thick oil smelling like
fresh meat.

As for the bones that were in the big cooking pot of black &
rotten that they had been they were now as white and transparent
as nacre or pearls.

5 times a day he would massage my legs with his liquid. Believe
it or not after the very first day I could move my toes.

The 3rd day I could move and bend my legs & the 5th day I could
walk with a cane in the yard & in 1 week my legs were back to
normal. PRAISE BE TO GOD!"

One may wonder why doctors don't try this remedy. Well, for one
they don't speak Russian, nor are they incline to try old folks
remedy.

Many of them would rather sell pills then cure the pain. If you
have this rheumatism what have you got to loose but the pain.

Perronaly I NEVER tried it for I don't suffer from it but be sure
that I will do if ever I am in that situation.

One should REMEMBER how penicillin was first discover. The
doctors had noticed that wrapping war wounds with old cheese
cloth would cure their patient faster without the deadly
gangrene. They did not know why this old folk remedy worked but
the results were there. 

So with the help of technology they discovered the reason that
was that old cheese cloth that had serve to wrap cheese had
mushroom embedded in it, the first start of penicillin in its raw
state.

I know of one person who tried it, she was suffering greatly from
it, and upon my advice, she gave it a try.

The result was sensational she told me a few years later "away
with the crutches & she even build her own house to boot."

               NOTE FROM DICK THE CO-AUTHOR:

Now you have it, a resume a memento on Survival from 70 authors
and more from 2001 BC to 2001 AD to help you and others in
Survival.

Lets hope! Es-Perron-Le that you never have to use it but should
it be the case then you will have the upper psychological hand
and that may very well make the difference between life or death.

IT IS UPLOADED FREEWARE TO ANYONE ON THE PLANET AND WE ENCOURAGE
ANYONE TO PASS IT AROUND FREELY.

It is not finished even to edit but I am working on it, any
suggestions or tips are welcome, just upload them to me e-mail.

More will come on Survival techniques later on covering all the
other usual subjects such as First-Aid, how to find water, make
shelters, food and plants, hunting and fishings tricks etc.
Covering all climates and conditions on land or at sea. 

It will be uploaded under the title: Survival Bible 2001 or
Survival. Zip. However it will still take me 1 or 2 years to have
it all finish using hyper text and even CD Rom edition including
2001 plants world wide edible or medicinal even dangerous one to
avoid.

I ask only of one thing, anyone out there who has any tricks or
suggestions  the more the merrier, we urge,ask and even beg  you
for tricks on Survival tips and thecniques so send them back
through Internet  to me and others be my guest and be a part of
this mural or library of knowledge from our ancestors who
suffered even died to bring us those informations for us and our
loved ones. 

We will add your tricks and tips of this difficult art of
Survival or knowledge of nature and how to cope for a good time
even while lost one still can make him or herself comfortable and
better his or her chances or Survival for himself or others.

RICHARD @IO.ORG. 1 December 1994/ 1 FEB 1995
 
