

Subject: Trapping small animals after PS
Sent: 30 Oct 88

If one has pets or ends up acclimating pets after the PS - how does one protect 
them from animal traps in the vicinity that are set to provide food for the 
table?  

One could lock our pets indoors or behind a fence we construct after PS and only 
set traps outside this fence.  If no fencing is possible, one could set "live 
traps" for close to home.  These are basically cages with a one way door.  If a 
pet anciently got caught it would sooner or later learn not to get caught or to 
recognize it as a trap.  Further distance away from home one could use a spring 
traps, wire snare or other kinds. 

Chagnon's Hunting, Fishing & Trapping Supply Route2, Box 2638B, Manistique, Mi. 
49854 has a good catalog of many different types of traps and "live" cages.  
Call 800-795-5157 to request a catalog or on-line at http://trap-
supply.hypermart.net

We also need to think of ways of making live traps out of commonly available 
items.

One way would be to take a common dog or cat carrier as found in the pet or 
local grocery stores and modify it to be come a live trapping cage.  On some the 
door swings out now on others it swings both way depending on how it is opened.  
This may need to be modified so that it swings only inward.  The cage could be 
used on its side so the door swings from the inside top.  It would also be 
desirable to rig a snap or latch so that as pressure is put on the inside of the 
door by the animal it will self latch.  The cage could be mounted such that the 
door tends to close due to gravity or mount a spring to assists it.  We would 
need to test a few configurations. 

Any additional ideas and sources are quite welcome.
 
